Skip to main content
 
Texts
 
Video
 
Audio
 
Software
 
Images
Sign up for free
Log in
 Search metadata
 Search text contents
 Search TV news captions
 Search radio transcripts
 Search archived web sites
Advanced Search
About Blog Events Projects Help Donate  Contact Jobs Volunteer
Full text of "Common Disease and Treatment"
See other formats


Adenoids—Fuilface and profile views of a youngster with adenoid growths. The lips are 
parted, corners of the mouth are turned downward, and the facial expression is passive and 
dull. The adenoids are masses of tissue located in the back of the nasal and mouth cavities. 
When enlarged, they obstruct breathing through the nose. 


Velops. Characteristic structural 
changes of the face may take place. 
The mouth hangs open and the 
upper teeth become prominent and 
give the face a rabbit-like, dull ex¬ 
pression. 

A child with troublesome adenoids 
is apt to suffer from disturbed sleep 
and bed wetting, and will often 
awaken irritable and peevish. Hear¬ 
ing is often impaired. 

In addition, infected adenoids are 
usually associated with infected ton¬ 
sils and the child becomes inattentive 
and seems dull. Therefore, adenoids 
which are repeatedly inflamed must 
receive medical attention. 

Early mild cases can be controlled 
with antibiotics which usually will 
prevent more serious complications, 
such as deafness, kidney disease. 


rheumatic fever. However, the re¬ 
moval of diseased and enlarged 
adenoids and tonsils is ordinarily 
recommended by the doctor. The 
operation, though simple and short, 
is most effective. See also child case. 

ADENOMA, a form of tumor which 
occurs in the cellular tissue of a 
gland. It is usually treated according 
to the organ involved. 

ADENOSIS, any disorder of the 
glands, particularly, however, one 
that involves the lymph nodes. 

ADHESIECTOMY, scientific term 
for surgical removal of adhesions. 

ADEDESIONS, generally the cohesion 
of adjacent organs or surfaces which 
are normally separate. When tissues 
heal, for example, fibrous scars are 

19 



;d which cause the segments to 
e to each other. Following 
tions within the abdomen, ad- 
is sometimes cause pains when 
1 or stretched because fibrous 
is not elastic. 

’OSIS, corpulence or obesity; 
xcessive accumulation, either 
al or local, of fat in the body. 

EXA, the adjunct parts of any 
. Adnexa uteri, for example, are 
/aries and Fallopian tubes, and 
a oculi are the lids of the eyes. 

LESCENCE, the period in hu- 
growth between the ending of 
lood and the attainment of full 
:al development. During this 
I anatomic development and 
liar changes culminate in pu- 
at about the age of twelve for 
md fourteen for boys. In girls, 
ruation begins at this time, al- 
1 it may occur a year or two 
■ or later. The breasts develop, 
Ivis broadens, and the body be- 
more rounded, acquiring dis- 
e female characteristics. In 
hair grows on the face, sexual 
. mature, and the larynx en- 
causing the voice to “break.” 

oth sexes the physical changes 
sociated with emotional and 
development. The rapid 
i at this time is likely to make 
demands on the adolescent, 
djustment to the glandular 
s as wen as the whole growth 
5 is often difficult. Reactions 
itions are apt to be keener and 
aimediate; feelings, whether of 
depression, to be more intense 


than previously. The boy may become 
concerned that he is not growing as 
fast as his friends, or that his voice 
cracks, or by the appearance of hair 
on his face and body. The girl may re¬ 
gard with embarrassment the begin¬ 
ning of menstruation and its recur¬ 
rence every month. 

Parents, during this period, may be 
alarmed at what appears to be erratic 
growth and rapidly shifting moods in 
their children who want love and 
attention one minute and “to be left 
alone” the next. However, if the 
proper foundation of love and secu¬ 
rity has been laid during infancy and 
childhood, the adolescent years can 
be productive and rewarding for both 
parents and children. By gradually 
preparing the child for the physical 
changes that wifi, take place, including 
giving him the necessary information 
about sex and reproduction, the 
shock of the onset of awakening 
maturity can be softened. 

Even with understanding and sym¬ 
pathy, the adolescent will often stiU 
be subject to tensions, rebellion, and 
conflicting emotions. The period of 
adolescence may demand a large 
measure of patience and tolerance 
from the parents. Faced with hostile 
parental attitudes, the growing child 
may develop feelings of insecurity 
that find understandable but often 
undesirable outlets. While the adoles¬ 
cent may rebel against authority in 
the home, acceptance and approval 
by his group is of paramount impor¬ 
tance to him. Few influences will 
shake him from conformity to teen¬ 
age standards and values. The change 
from dependence upon parents and 



home to identification with his peer 
group is a natural step in the process 
of maturing. 

Hero worship, romantic attach¬ 
ments that may ripen and wilt in 
rapid succession, and an intense de¬ 
sire for privacy are normal behavior 
manifestations of the adolescent. 
Unless the phase becomes too intense 
or prolonged, authorities on child 
development consider that parents 
should not intervene since ordinarfiy 
time and growing maturity will limit 
or terminate it. 

The proper attitudes on the part of 
the parents can be of immeasurable 
help in assuring that the period of 
adolescence is a significant and mean¬ 
ingful step toward maturity. 

ADOPTION. Adopting a child is 
often a remarkably satisfying solution 
for a couple who want a family 
and are unable to have children. 
However, any husband and wife con¬ 
sidering adopting a child should give 
the matter thorough and mature 
thought; it is obviously a far more 
serious question than whether or not 
to buy a car or fur coat. 

The decision to adopt a child is 
only the initial step. After the couple 
have registered with a state-licensed 
adoption agency, it may be months 
or even years before the agency is 
able to present them with a child to 
consider for their own. Every legal 
adoption agency makes an exhaustive 
examination into the husband and 
wife’s background, economic situ¬ 
ation, religious beliefs, personality, 
general home life, physical condition, 
mental capacity, and other areas. 


Children up for adoption have re¬ 
ceived an equally thorough exami¬ 
nation. For various reasons, not 
every couple is eligible to adopt a 
child, nor every homeless child 
adoptable. The agency attempts to 
place the child in a home most 
mutually congenial to the prospective 
foster parents and to the child. 

Prospective foster parents should 
try not to have rigid ideas regarding 
the type of child they would Uke. A 
couple who have decided, for ex¬ 
ample, that they want a curly-headed 
two-year-old girl are only impeding 
their chance of getting any child. 
The agency would like to feel that 
the child is desired for qualities more 
important than curliness of hair and, 
more practically speaking, the 
number of curly-headed two-year- 
old girls may be limited. Whenever 
possible, the agency will try to match 
the child and couple in as many ways 
as it can. Before legal adoption 
papers are finally taken out, there is 
a trial period during which the 
couple have the child in their home 
and are able to decide whether or 
not this is the child they want and 
the agency decides whether place¬ 
ment is suitable. 

At the present time, the demand 
for children far exceeds the supply of 
adoptable children available. Because 
of this scarcity, there have sprung 
up all over the country black- or 
gray-market adoption agencies which 
financially exploit the often very 
intense desire of a husband and 
wife to have a child as soon as 
possible. Anyone who adopts a child 
through such illegal channels is tak- 

21 



tremendous risk; since the black- 
cet agencies operate outside legal 
lards regarding adoptability of a 
1 and may have false or little or 
nformation about the child, the 
tie could conceivably get a men- 
or physically defective child, 
pective foster parents should al- 
, deal with a legal adoption 
cy whose primary goal is to bring 
her a couple and a child under 
>est possible circumstances, 
happier and more fortunate out- 
th of the problem of scarcity of 
table children is the increasing 
3er of foreign-bom children who 
>eing adopted. This possibility 
d'be considered by couples de- 
s of adopting a child, 
r further information, write to 
1. S. Government Printing Office 
isk for the U. S. Public Health 
:e’s pamphlet on adoption, 

1 gives all the legal requirements 
! various states. 

ENALIN, the trade name for 
phrine, is a hormone produced 
le adrenal glands. It was first 
jd by a Japanese scientist, 
li Takamine, in 1901. 
s drug stimulates heart action, 
es blood pressure, constricts 
vessels, and tends to stop 
ng in wounds. When injected 
le body with other medicines, it 
their absorption into the blood 
1 . Adrenalin is used to relax the 
es in the bronchial tubes, thus 
ig it an invaluable aid in the 
lent of severe asthmatic attacks. 
Iso used extensively to counter- 
ypersensitivity and allergic re¬ 


actions. See also ali.i-rgy; asthma: 

HAY FEVER. 

ADRENAL GLANDS. I -ying above 
each kidney is a small body called an 
adrenal gland, the outer part or cor¬ 
tex of which encloses the inner part, 
or medulla. The adrenals are a sig¬ 
nificant part of the system of endo¬ 
crine glands which control and co¬ 
ordinate, by means of specialized 
secretions, many of the body's most 
essential functions. 

So essential to life are the adrenals, 
particularly the cortex, that when 
they are removed experimentally 
from an animal it dies within a few 
days. Similarly destruction of the 
adrenals by infection or injury causes 
death. 

The medulla produces a secretion 
or hormone called epinephrine, su- 
prarenin, or adrenalin. This sub¬ 
stance, supplied to the body through 
the blood stream, prepares the body 
physically when emergencies are en¬ 
countered; breathing and pulse are 
speeded, blood pressure is raised, the 
sugar content of the blood is in¬ 
creased, and the muscles are tempo¬ 
rarily strengthened. Adrenalin also 
relaxes the bronchial muscles and is 
used to relieve the symptoms of 
asthma and hay fever. 

The adrenal cortex secretes many 
hormones, including cortisone, dihy¬ 
drocortisone, and aldosterone. The 
cortical hormones are significant in 
the basic defenses of the body against 
various infections, poisons, and other 
invasions or threats. They are also 
concerned with the regulation of the 
supply of salt and water and the 



maintenance of correct blood pres¬ 
sure. Injury or damage to the adrenal 
cortex, which causes deficiency of its 
secretions, produces a serious con¬ 
dition called Addison’s disease, which 
may be fatal, although its severity 
varies. See also addison’s disease. 

AEDES AEGYPTI, a species of 
mosquito which transmits yellow 
fever. This insect is also called 
“yellow Jack” or yellow fever mos¬ 
quito. If the mosquito bites a person 
with yellow fever during the first 
three days of illness, it may pick up 
the organisms which cause the in¬ 
fection in man. Once this has oc¬ 
curred, the mosquito retains the 
ability to transmit these organisms 
and thus the infection to other hu¬ 
man beings. See also mosquito; 
YELLOW FEVER. 

AERO OTITIS MEDIA, a painful 
condition of the ear caused by in¬ 
flammation of the middle ear. This 
disorder affects some people during 
changes of altitude—for example, 
when descending in airplanes from 
high altitudes. Symptoms like con¬ 
gestion and painful inflammation 
may be followed by temporary or 
permanent impairment of hearing. 
Relief usually follows quickly. How¬ 
ever, if the pain continues and is 
not relieved by simple ordinary 
medication, a physician should be 
consulted. 

Aero otitis media develops from 
the pressure difference of the air, 
which causes the eardrums to pro¬ 
trude into the inside. The Eustachian 
tube, which extends from the back of 
the nasal passage to the middle ear, 


may thus be obstructed and not open 
frequently enough to balance the 
difference in pressure between the 
atmosphere and the middle ear. If 
discomfort is caused by changes in 
altitude, physicians advise lusty yawn¬ 
ing, hard swallowing, opening the 
mouth wide, or chewing gum. All 
these measures help to open the 
Eustachian tubes. 

AEROBIC refers to the need of free 
oxygen or air required for life. The 
term is used in connection with 
bacteria that demand atmospheric 
oxygen to survive. Anaerobic bacteria 
live only without oxygen. 

AEROPHAGIA, a condition caused 
by swallowing an excessive amount 
of air either consciously or uncon¬ 
sciously. It is apt to cause belching 
and stomach discomfort and is most 
common in children and hysterical 
persons. 

AFFECT (psychology), a mood, a 
feeling, or an emotion as it influences 
a mental state or idea. 

AFFERENT NERVES, sensory 
nerves that transmit impulses from 
the outside to the central nervous 
system. 

AFTERBIRTH, or placenta, a tissue 

Afterbirth— Shortly after a baby has been 

delivered, the placenta ("the afterbirth'') 
breaks off from the v/afl of the womb (uterus) 
and is expelled. At this time its diameter is 
somewhat less than a dinner plate. 




cn carries nutrition and oxygen to 
child, while it is in the mother’s 
nb. Together with the umbilical 
i and membranes it is expelled 
Q the uterus after the child has 
1 born; hence, “afterbirth.” 

TERPAINS, spasmodic cramps in 
lower abdomen which resemble 
ir pains, though are not as severe, 
may occur for two or three days 
r childbirth. These pains develop 
1 the efforts of the uterus to 
ract to normal size again, and are 
iger in women who have previ- 
y borne children. See also preg- 
CV AND PRENATAL CARE. 

iLACTIA, the condition follow- 
chUdbirth when the secretion of 
St milk is absent in the mother. 

kR, a form of seaweed, Malay 
, which is used in medicine to 
ide bulk in the material excreted 
the bowel. Sometimes drugs, 
ral oil, or petrolatum are added 
e agar. Also called agar-agar, the 
gelatinous substance is used in 
riological research as a medium 
ireeding and preserving micro- 
lisms. 

;LUTINATI0N, a chemical re- 
1 in which cells, such as bacteria 
lood corpuscles, suspended in 
1 collect into clumps when the 
uspension is treated with serum 
nized against cells of the same 
md species. 

OSIA, lack of power of per- 
m or recognition in one or more 
senses. 

RAPHOBIA, morbid fear of 


open unenclosed places; as opposed 
to claustrophobia. See also claus¬ 
trophobia. 

AGRANULOCYTOSIS, an acute 
fever-producing disease characterized 
by high fever, ulcerative lesions ot 
the mucous membrane in the mouth, 
throat, and other areas, and a great 
reduction in the granular white blood 
cells. The disease is fairly rare, par¬ 
ticularly in children, and occurs more 
often in females than males. 

Excessive white blood cells called 
leukemia is extremely serious. Even 
more serious may be a sudden de¬ 
crease in the number of white blood 
cells or their disappearance from the 
blood. The white blood cells arc the 
chief defense against infection, and 
their sudden decrease or disap¬ 
pearance from the blood can lead to 
an overwhelming attack by dangerous 
germs which can cause death in a 
day or occasionally in a few hours. 

In agranulocytosis or granulocyto¬ 
penia the number of red blood cells is 
normal in amount, but the white 
blood cells may drop from 7,500 per 
cubic millimeter to 1,000 or even 
much less. Since, as a result, the 
white blood cells are so many fewer 
in number than the red blood cells, 
examination of one specimen after 
another may fail to indicate the pres¬ 
ence of even a few white blood cells. 

The exact cause of this condition 
is not definitely known, although re¬ 
cently it has become apparent that 
reaction of the body to various drugs 
or sensitivity to certain toxic agents 
may be responsible. Many cases have 
been reported in which agranulocyto- 



sis occurred after the taking of a drug 
called amidopyrine or Pyramidon, 
and also in association with various 
coal-tar remedies and sulfonamide 
drugs. Apparently the bone marrow 
of the body is attacked, so that it 
cannot form the white blood cells in 
the usual manner. Moreover, in some 
cases, the condition develops a cyclic 
character and at regular intervals the 
number of white blood cells decreases 
and then gradually increases. 

Because the body is no longer pro¬ 
tected against infection, one of the 
first signs is severe ulceration of the 
throat and destruction of the tissue 
of the gums and tonsils. Other parts 
of the body may be attacked, and 
infections of the kidneys, heart, or 
even the skin become apparent. 

The severity of agranulocytosis is 
reflected by the fact that about 75 
per cent of those affected die. Treat¬ 
ment of the disease includes—most 
essential—immediate rest in bed, 
cleaning of the infected areas, drink¬ 
ing fluids, and antibiotics like penicil¬ 
lin or terramycin to control infection 
which develops easily in the absence 
of white blood cells. Any remedies 
must be prescribed by the doctor, 
in conjunction with regular exami¬ 
nation of the blood to indicate the 
progress or remission of the disease. 
See also granulocytopenia. 

AGUE, the former name of malaria. 
It also describes chills associated with 
intermittent fever and various other 
conditions. 

Brass founders’ ague, common 
among brass workers, is an occupa¬ 
tional disease with symptoms of inter¬ 


mittent fever. Partial ague is a painful 
affliction, limited to some part of the 
body—as, for instance, brow ague or 
facial ague, which is intermittent 
neuralgia of the brow or face. See 
also TIC DOULOUREUX. 

AIRSICKNESS. See motion sick¬ 
ness. 

AKINETIC refers to loss or impair¬ 
ment of muscular action and power 
of movement from any cause. See 
also MUSCLE. 

ALBINO, a person in whom melanin, 
the dark pigment which gives color 
to skin, hair, and part of the eye, 
is absent. The hair of the albino is 
platinum blond, and the skin is pink, 
since the blood circulating in the skin 
capillaries shows through the skin. 
The eyes have a distinctive pinkish 
hue because pigment is absent from 
the iris and the blood vessels are 
reflected through the pupil. Some¬ 
times this lack of pigmentation of the 
eye may cause defective vision and 
create extreme sensitivity to light, 
and therefore direct exposure to the 
sun should be avoided by albinos. 
Ordinarily an albino has less energy 
and is more delicate than other per¬ 
sons. While the condition is abnormal 
in these respects, albinism is not con¬ 
sidered a disease. It is hereditary and 
if both parents carry the albino gene 
their offspring are certain to be al¬ 
binos. The condition, however, tends 
to be recessive and about one person 
in 10,000 is affected. When albinism 
is present in a family, a physician can 
usually estimate the chance of its re¬ 
currence in future generations. 


25 



_■wv*'jL iAvo xj-uiii. uA.y ^di lO 

the child, while it is in the mother’s 
womb. Together with the umbilical 
cord and membranes it is expelled 
from the uterus after the child has 
been born; hence, “afterbirth.” 

AFTERPAINS, spasmodic cramps in 
the lower abdomen which resemble 
labor pains, though are not as severe, 
and may occur for two or three days 
after childbirth. These pains develop 
from the efforts of the uterus to 
contract to normal size again, and are 
stronger in women who have previ¬ 
ously borne children. See also preg¬ 
nancy ANO PRENATAL CARE. 

AGALACTIA, the condition follow¬ 
ing childbirth when the secretion of 
breast milk is absent in the mother. 

AGAR, a form of seaweed, Malay 
type, which is used in medicine to 
provide bulk in the material excreted 
from the bowel. Sometimes drugs, 
mineral oil, or petrolatum are added 
to the agar. Also called agar-agar, the 
dried gelatinous substance is used in 
bacteriological research as a medium 
or breeding and preserving micro- 
)rganisms. 

AGGLUTINATION, a chemical re- 
ction in which cells, such as bacteria 
r blood corpuscles, suspended in 
quid collect into clumps when the 
ell suspension is treated with serum 
nmunked against cells of the same 
ind and species. 

.GNOSIA, lack of power of per- 
jption or recognition in one or more 
f the senses. 

GORAPHOBIA, morbid fear of 

4 


open unenclosed places; as opposed 
to claustrophobia. See also u.hus- 

TROPHOBIA. 

AGRANULOCYTOSIS, an acute 
fever-producing disease characterized 
by high fever, ulcerative lesions of 
the mucous membrane in the mouth, 
throat, and other areas, and a great 
reduction in the granular white blood 
cells. The disease is fairly rare, par¬ 
ticularly in children, and occurs more 
often in females than males. 

Excessive white blood cells called 
leukemia is extremely serious. Even 
more serious may be a sudden de¬ 
crease in the number of white blood 
cells or their disappearance from the 
blood. The white blood ceils are the 
chief defense against infection, and 
their sudden decrease or disap¬ 
pearance from the blood can lead to 
an overwhelming attack by dangerous 
germs which can cause death in a 
day or occasionally in a few hours. 

In agranulocytosis or granulocyto¬ 
penia the number of red blood cells is 
normal in amount, but the white 
blood cells may drop from 7,500 per 
cubic millimeter to 1,000 or even 
much less. Since, as a result, the 
white blood cells are so many fewer 
in number than the red blood cells, 
examination of one specimen after 
another may fail to indicate the pres¬ 
ence of even a few white blood cells. 

The exact cause of this condition 
is not definitely known, although re¬ 
cently it has become apparent that 
reaction of the body to various drugs 
or sensitivity to certain toxic agents 
may be responsible. Many cases have 
been reported in which agranulocyto- 



sis occurred after the taking of a drug 
called amidopyrine or Pyramidon, 
and also in association with various 
coal-tar remedies and sulfonamide 
drugs. Apparently the bone marrow 
of the body is attacked, so that it 
cannot form the white blood cells in 
the usual manner. Moreover, in some 
cases, the condition develops a cyclic 
character and at regular intervals the 
number of white blood cells decreases 
and then gradually increases. 

Because the body is no longer pro¬ 
tected against infection, one of the 
first signs is severe ulceration of the 
throat and destruction of the tissue 
of the gums and tonsils. Other parts 
of the body may be attacked, and 
infections of the kidneys, heart, or 
even the skin become apparent. 

The severity of agranulocytosis is 
reflected by the fact that about 75 
per cent of those afliected die. Treat¬ 
ment of the disease includes—most 
essential—immediate rest in bed, 
cleaning of the infected areas, drink¬ 
ing fluids, and antibiotics like penicil¬ 
lin or terramycin to control infection 
which develops easily in the absence 
of white blood cells. Any remedies 
must be prescribed by the doctor, 
in conjunction with regular exami¬ 
nation of the blood to indicate the 
progress or remission of the disease. 
See also granulocytopenia. 

AGUE, the former name of malaria. 
It also describes chills associated with 
intermittent fever and various other 
conditions. 

Brass founders’ ague, common 
among brass workers, is an occupa¬ 
tional disease with symptoms of inter¬ 


mittent fever. Partial ague is a painful 
affliction, limited to some part of the 
body—as, for instance, brow ague or 
facial ague, which is intermittent 
neuralgia of the brow or face. See 
also TIC DOULOUREUX. 

AIRSICKNESS. See motion sick¬ 
ness. 

AKINETIC refers to loss or impair¬ 
ment of muscular action and power 
of movement from any cause. See 
also MUSCLE. 

ALBINO, a person in whom melanin, 
the dark pigment which gives color 
to skin, hair, and part of the eye, 
is absent. The hair of the albino is 
platinum blond, and the skin is pink, 
since the blood circulating in the skin 
capillaries shows through the skin. 
The eyes have a distinctive pinkish 
hue because pigment is absent from 
the iris and the blood vessels are 
reflected through the pupil. Some¬ 
times this lack of pigmentation of the 
eye may cause defective vision and 
create extreme sensitivity to light, 
and therefore direct exposure to the 
sun should be avoided by albinos. 
Ordinarily an albino has less energy 
and is more delicate than other per¬ 
sons. While the condition is abnormal 
in these respects, albinism is not con¬ 
sidered a disease. It is hereditary and 
if both parents carry the albino gene 
their offspring are certain to be al¬ 
binos. The condition, however, tends 
to be recessive and about one person 
in 10,000 is affected. When albinism 
is present in a family, a physician can 
usually estimate the chance of its re¬ 
currence in future generations. 


25 



o viCcil illlLi'ISt JsLIObldllCicC 

soluble in water and coagulated by 
heat, is one of a group of protein 
substances, the chief element of most 
animal and vegetable tissues, and the 
most significant part of blood serum 
or plasma. The largest component of 
egg white is albumen. 

Digested foods provide proteins 
which are distributed by the blood to 
the rest of the body to sustain growth, 
and then absorbed in the kidneys 
and redistributed through the body. 

Human serum albumin is a com¬ 
mercial preparation, used in the treat¬ 
ment of shock and to supplement 
nsufficient proteins in the blood 
serum. See also protein. 

kLBUMINURIA, the presence of 
ilbumin in the urine which can be 
asily detected by examination. It 
s an early sign that the kidneys are 
sot functioning properly. Sometimes, 


nowever, albuminuria may occur 
temporarily as a consequence of a 
high protein diet or following strenu¬ 
ous exercise. See also kidneys. 

ALCOHOL. Ordinarily ethyl alcohol 
refers to a clear colorless fluid which 
is fit for human consumption when 
diluted. Alcohol is inflammable and 
has a characteristic taste and odor. It 
is obtained by distilling fermented 
solutions of sugar, grain, or starchy 
substances, or it may be prepared 
artificially. Whiskey, gin, rum, beer, 
ale, stout, wine, and brandy are some 
of the alcoholic beverages in common 
use. 

Alcohol can act as a drug, a 
beverage, or a poison. Applied to the 
skin, it has a cooling and refresh¬ 
ing efllect. In solutions of 70 per cent 
or over, other types of alcohol are 
used as antiseptics in medicine. 

Small doses of alcohol are stimulat- 


^ J -jy j I /*. L j 


Gulping dunks 


at tired feeling", "nerves , 
rubles', "for depression ' 


Losing time from work because of frequent sprees 


Lying about how much drinking or when! 


akmg drinks before parties and appointments 


s about drinking, 
on the wagon ' 


"Blackouts" 


Making drinks a must with any "special event" 
(which may be as ordinary as a ball game or movie) 



) 






ing and produce a temporary sense of 
warmth and well-being. Alcohol di¬ 
lates the blood vessels of the skin and 
brings an increased flow of warm 
blood to the skin surfaces. However, 
the blood in the body is cooled off 
by this action and body temperature 
drops. Alcohol also depresses the 
central nervous system, and acts as 
an anesthetic upon the cerebral cor¬ 
tex, which controls behavior. When 
a person brightens up after a drink 
or speaks and acts more freely than 
usual, he does so because the restrain¬ 
ing influences which he usually ex¬ 
ercises have been diminished. Moder¬ 
ate drinking, even as a daily habit, is 
practiced by many people without 
harmful effects. However, excessive 
amounts of alcohol may act as a 
poison and seriously damage the 
body. 

Alcohol is quickly burnt up in 
the body and has little food value. 


The body does not have a way of 
storing alcohol, and excessive 
amounts irritate the stomach and 
cause chronic gastritis. Constant 
excessive drinking may also damage 
the liver, the kidneys, and other 
body organs. The central nervous 
system becomes depressed, and with 
continued indulgence the entire sys¬ 
tem is devitalized. Coordination of 
muscles and nerves is diminished, 
speech becomes thicker, gait and 
sense of balance are impaired, judg¬ 
ment suffers, mental changes are 
apparent. Constant excessive use of 
alcohol often leads to stupor, de¬ 
lirium tremens, or other manifesta¬ 
tions of serious damage. See abo 
alcoholism; delirium tremens. 

ALCOHOLISM, poisoning by alco¬ 
hol, or the severe results of prolonged 
and excessive consumption of alcohol. 
The alcoholic has a compulsive need 


//flO 13 All aLCDJ-IOLIC? 


Is one of 4 million alcoholics in the U S 


The alcoholic is someone whose drinking causes a 
continuing problem in any department of his life 


Has been drinking 10 to 15 years 


Can come from any level of intelligence moron to genius 


Can come from any walk of life 


One of SIX is a woman 


Has an aversion to food, leading to nutritional deficiencies 



?7 



Lm diwuuoi ano can abstain only with 
jreat difficulty or not at all. Usually 
le is totally unable to help himself 
>ut of his situation. The causes of 
ilcoholism are deeply rooted in the 
varying needs and insecurities of the 
ndividual. There is no such thing as 
n “alcoholic tjrpe.” An alcoholic 
nay drink steadily day after day or 
le may have short periods of absti- 
ence followed by a drinking bout. 

The effects of alcoholism are 
erious, both mentally and physically, 
he compulsive drinker gradually 
)ses his desire for food and may de¬ 
slop dangerous malnutrition with 
1 its varying symptoms. The liver 
lay become enlarged, the heart 
imaged, and other organs affected, 
he central nervous system is de- 
■essed, and a steady and progressive 
sintegration of personality takes 
ace. 

If alcoholism continues, the person 
lU eventually develop delirium 
jmens, in which he loses all sense 
time, space, and surroundings and 
racked by terrifying visual halluci- 
tions. During this time, many 
loholics have seriously injured 
jmselves in their efforts to escape 
)m their hallucinations. The condi- 
n lasts for from three to seven days 
i requires emergency treatment, 
terward the alcoWic will usually 
'ert to his usual state. Death may 
ult from an attack of delirium tre- 
ns if hospitalization and competent 
dical care are not secured. 
Tospitalization is desirable in treat- 
the compulsive drinker who 
hes to be cured. Physical factors 
a significant part of alcoholism. 


and treatment includes both medical 
as well as psychological care. The in¬ 
fluence of the endocrine glands, hor¬ 
mones, metabolism, and diet on 
alcoholism is being investigated. New 
tranquilizing drugs, such as chlor- 
promazine, and Miltown, when used 
with discretion, have been helpful, 
and a drug called Antabuse is some¬ 
times used to condition the alcoholic 
against drinking. After the first stages 
of recovery have been reached, the 
alcoholic may respond to psychiatric 
treatment. Group therapy, in which 
victims of a common affliction meet 
and talk, has proved helpful. 

Among the many organizations 
dedicated to helping the alcoholic, the 
best known is Alcoholics Anonymous, 
a group of men and women who 
have overcome alcoholism, and who 
actively help others to do so. Their 
sympathetic understanding of the 
problems of the compulsive drinker, 
based upon their own experiences, 
and their philosophy of mutual help 
have proved to be one of the most 
effective adjuncts in treating alcohol¬ 
ism. Alcoholics Anonymous has 
branches in almost every city in the 
United States and in many countries 
throughout the world. 

The combined efforts of medicine, 
psychiatry, and organizations like 
Alcholics Anonymous have brought 
about an increasing rate of recovery 
in what was once considered a hope¬ 
less problem. See also antabuse; 
DELIRIUM TREMENS 

ALEXIA, sometimes called word 
blindness, a form of aphasia in which 
the victim is unable to recognize or 





l^iwa.iJJL^j WiliL/U 50011 rCpiS-CCd H.il 

cocaine derivatives. At present, spinal 
anesthesia employing novocaine has 
become extensively used in operations 
for appendectomy, and on the lower 
abdomen and legs. 

An outgrowth of spinal anesthesia 
was the development of caudal 
anesthesia, in which the anesthetic 
is injected into the sacral canal. In 
“painless childbirth,” the anesthetic 
is injected in small amounts, a con¬ 
tinuous “drip injection,” into the 
region of the coccyx and acts on 
nerves leading to the womb. 

Improvements in the methods of 
administering anesthetics have ac¬ 
companied the discovery of safer 
drugs. One of the most significant 
steps has been the development of the 
‘closed system” of administration. In 
the past, ether was given by dropping 
t into an open cone held over the 
jatient’s face. In the new system of 
idministering ether, or supplementary 
;ases, the gas is conducted through 
i series of closed tubes leading into 
I mask fitted tightly over the patient’s 
ace. This apparatus can absorb the 
arbon dioxide in the air exhaled by 
he patient, add oxygen when it is 
eeded to the air inhaled, and add the 
nesthetic gases in the necessary con- 
entrations. Anesthesia can thus be 
arried on for a much longer time 
nd with much greater safety. 

New and better anesthetics have 
mtinued to be developed. Ethylene 
id cyclopropane are in common use 
I many hospitals, although they have 
le one disadvantage, not yet com- 
etely overcome, of being highly 
.plosive. 


Another current method of ad¬ 
ministering an anesthetic is the in¬ 
travenous or basal method in which 
the anesthetic drug is injected directly 
into the blood through the vein. The 
amormt injected can be controlled by 
a stopcock on the needle and the 
anesthetic may be given in small 
amounts, thus keeping the patient 
free from pain for a long period of 
time. One of the first drugs used m 
this type of anesthesia was evipal, a 
barbiturate. Another more potent 
barbiturate now used is pentothal 
sodium. 

The practice of anesthesia, which 
entails a knowledge of the proper 
administration of an anesthetic dur¬ 
ing an operation, the management of 
the patient’s respiration, the ability 
to apply artificial respiration when 
necessary, and complete familiarity 
with the problems of gas therapy, 
has become a special field of medi¬ 
cine. Specialists who deal solely with 
this field are known as anesthetists 
or anesthesiologists. 


ANEURYSM, dilatation of an artery 



Aneurysm— An aneurysm is a weak spot in 
the side of a blood vessel which puffs out 

like a bailoon. 



or vein caused when a weak spot 
occurs in the wall. The layers of elas¬ 
tic tissue that form the wall enable 
the vessels to dilate and contract. 
When they are stretched at any point, 
because of innate weakness, the en¬ 
feebled section pouches out and 
causes distention, just as in the 
weakened wall of a rubber tire. 

This thinning out, which destroys 
a section of the elastic tissue, may 
be the result of an infection such as 
pneumonia, of a streptococcal or 
staphylococcal infection. Often physi¬ 
cal injury to an arterial wall leaves it 
so weakened that an aneurysm may 
eventually occur. If the blood-filled 
sac ruptures, a serious, often fatal 
hemorrhage may ensue. 

Aneurysms are of various types. 
When one of the layers of tissue of 
the wall of the blood vessel also be¬ 
comes the wall of the sac, a true 
aneurysm results. False aneurysms 
occur when the layers of the artery 
are all ruptured, leaving the sur¬ 
rounding tissues to retain the blood. 
Also the blood may force its way 
between layers of the arterial wall 
and separate them. 

All arteries are subject to aneu¬ 
rysms, and a most commonly af¬ 
fected artery is the aorta, the large 
artery leading from the heart. The 
disorder may develop in a blood ves¬ 
sel as the result of an injury, and 
even though such aneurysms are 
smaller they are no less dangerous, 
and may prove fatal when they 
occur in the heart, brain, or other 
vital organ. 

Should the aneurysm become 
greatly enlarged, pressure is exerted 



AJiewrysm—An aneurysm may form rn any 
artery of the body. A common site is in the 
aorta, the largest artery in the body. A very 
large aneurysm of the aorta in the abdomen 
is shown (fop) before surgery. The aneurysm 
has been removed and the damaged area 
of the aorta repaired (boffom) In the past, 
treatment for an aneurysm was not very 
satisfactory and death often resulted. Today, 
gratifying results are being achieved with 
new and improved techniques for removing 
aneurysms and repairing vessels. 

and crowds the area in which it oc¬ 
curs, such as the abdominal or chest 
cavity. Ameiuysms may be painful, 
or produce difficulty in breathing. 



ayspnea, by pressmg against the air 
passages, or cause swelling. 

New techniques of surgery have 
been developed to repair the damaged 
artery walls. Smaller blood vessels 
are tied off and other arteries take 
over their function. It is also possible 
to coagulate the blood in the sac and 
form a clot and thus strengthen the 
walls. Plastic materials are used 
around the aneurysm to prevent its 
growth, giving the weakened arterial 
wall opportunity to strengthen. 

ANGINA PECTORIS means pain in 
the chest, a symptom which ac¬ 
companies any interference with 
blood supply or oxygenation of the 
heart muscle. Men are affected five 



Inginci Pecf©ris—The black ouMine shows 
he position of the heart in the chest cavity, 
he heart lies under the sternum (breast- 
lone) and extends to the left of it. In the 
iverage-sized adult the heart weighs just 
nder three-quarters of a pound. 


times as often as women, and the 
symptom is seen most frequently in 
the sixth and seventh decades of life, 
though younger people are also af¬ 
fected. High-strung, sensitive, active 
people are most commonly subject 
to it, and in 90 per cent of cases, 
arteriosclerosis, or hardening of the 
arteries, is noted. Persons with dia¬ 
betes, high blood pressure, rheumatic 
heart disease, and anemia are more 
susceptible than others to angina 
pectoris. 

The heart muscles, like all muscles, 
depend upon the constant flow of 
oxygen-rich blood into the tissues in 
order to perform their required work 
and sustain their health. The blood 
vessels which supply the heart with 
blood are the coronary vessels. Any 
change in the caliber of these sig¬ 
nificant vessels, such as sudden nar¬ 
rowing or blockage, will seriously in¬ 
terfere with the flow of oxygen and 
nourishment to the heart muscle. 
When this occurs, pain results. 

The pain of angina pectoris is 
typically brief, lasting seldom more 
than three or four minutes. When 
longer, the cause may be something 
else. The pain is just under the breast¬ 
bone and often radiates to the neck 
and down the left arm. Occasionally 
it may move from the chest to the 
right arm, the stomach, or back. 

In most persons, exertion or emo¬ 
tion precipitates the attack. Under 
these circumstances, the heart muscle 
beats more rapidly and needs a faster, 
richer supply of oxygen and blood. 
If the coronary vessels are partially 
blocked by fatty deposits, as in 
arteriosclerosis, the circulation is not 



able to cope with the increased de¬ 
mands by the heart and angina re¬ 
sults. Angina frequently occurs after 
a heavy meal, because of the in¬ 
creased work load digestion places on 
the heart. 

Any strong emotion may precipi¬ 
tate an attack of angina, especially 
grief, anger, or worry. It may also 
occur in any occupation, though less 
commonly to laborers because of 
their better muscular development. 
Angina pectoris is more prevalent in 
cities and cold climates, probably be¬ 
cause of the faster paced life associ¬ 
ated with northern cities. 

Moderation is of the utmost im¬ 
portance in controlling angina pec¬ 
toris. At the first sign of chest pain, 
the person should immediately cease 
what he is doing and sit down and 
rest. Relief of pain will often come 
in a few minutes. To persist in exer¬ 
tion after the onset of pain is ex¬ 
tremely hazardous, and in this respect 
the pain is a significant symptom 
which infor m s the patient that he 

Anginci Pectoris—The course of the blood. 
The blood from the body travels in veins 
and empties into the largest vein, the vena 
cava. This large vein opens into the right 
auricle. Blood goes info the auricle, then 
right venfricte, and out into the lungs by 
way of the pulmonary artery. In the lungs 
the blood loses its carbon dioxide, picks up 
oxygen, and flows into the pulmonary vein 
into the left auricle. From the auricle the 
blood passes into the left ventricle which 
pushes the blood out into the arteries of the 
body. The largest of the arteries is called 
the aorta. The blood courses in the arteries, 
reaching microscopic vessels {the capillaries) 
which are embedded in the tissues. In the 
tissues the blood gives up oxygen and takes 
on carbon dioxide. The circuit is completed 
as the blood leaves the capillaries to enter 
the veins. It takes a blood ceil about a 
minute to complete the circuit. 




la uvctexeixmg iumselt and needs 
rest. 

Fortunately many drugs are availa¬ 
ble which give immediate relief to 
those with angina pectoris or a tend¬ 
ency to narrowing of the coronary 
vessels for whatever reason. Most 
popular is nitroglycerine, which 
causes a dilation, or widening, of the 
coronary vessels during an attack 
and thus permits more blood to flow 
through. Nitroglycerine, taken as a 
small tablet slipped under the tongue 
during an attack, brings relief almost 
immediately, and seldom later than 
two or three minutes. Amylnitrate, 
a medicine which is inhaled during 
an attack, can also be taken. Other 
drugs of a similar nature may be 
regularly prescribed for two or three 
times a day to prevent attacks. No 
drugs should be taken without con¬ 
sulting a doctor, as they may have 
unpleasant or serious side-effects. 

Relief of the acute attack, though 
momentarily significant, is not the 
entire solution to angina pectoris. The 
person’s daily life must be regulated 
so as to avoid situations liable to 
affect adversely the circulation to the 
heart. Here are ten rules which are 
applicable to the person with angina 
pectoris. 

1. Do not subject your heart to 
sudden, strenuous, or prolonged 
physical activity. 

2. Eat regularly, slowly, and tem¬ 
perately. 

3. Make every effort to keep your 
weight down, particularly after the 
age of forty. Angina pectoris is many 
times more common and serious in 
overweight persons. 


4. Avoid physical activity for at 
least thirty minutes after eating a 
heavy meal. 

5. Avoid emotional stress and 
strain. Plan your work so that you 
get sufficient rest. Avoid worry. 

6. Keep your body healthy and 
free from infection. 

7. Avoid constipation. 

8. Get at least eight hours of sleep 
a night in a room well supplied with 
fresh air. 

9. Keep fit with a regular moder¬ 
ate program of exercise. 

10. See your doctor regularly for a 
thorough checkup. 

The person who suffers from 
angina pectoris should not despair 
of his situation. It is not a disease, 
but a warning of danger from the 
heart. It is quite possible to live a 
fairly normal existence if the person 
takes proper care of himself and al¬ 
ways heeds the warning signal of 
pain. 

ANILINE, a colorless, oily liquid 
prepared from coal tar or benzene or 
indigo, used extensively in numerous 
industries for the manufacture of 
various chemicals, among them acet- 
anilid, acriflavine, methylene blue, 
and other antiseptic dyes. Aniline 
is highly poisonous and may enter 
the body through broken skin or 
through inhalation or ingestion of 
the oil or its fumes or dusts, and 
thus lead to poisoning of the body. 
Acute poisoning will cause sudden 
prostration; blue discoloration of the 
lips, nose, and fingera; and may be 
accompanied by unconsciousness and 
convulsions. In case of poisoning, the 


48 



doctor should be called immediately 
and the patient kept warm and given 
an emetic of a tablespoon of mustard 
in a glass of water. See also poison¬ 
ing. 

ANIMAL BITES AND WOUNDS. 
Animal bites often present a danger 
of rabies. Warm-blooded animals 
such as dogs, cats, and wild mam¬ 
mals including bats may transmit 
rabies. First aid procedure call for 
the immediate washing of the animal 
wound thoroughly and finding medi¬ 
cal care at once. Rabies always is 
fatal if it develops but preventive 
medical measures arc available. 
Don’t kill the dog or cal unless 
essential. Confine it at a veterinary 
facility or humane society. Its symp¬ 
toms then can be observed; if death 
ensues, the animal’s head can be ex¬ 
amined for evidence of rabies. 
Should the animal be killed at once, 
the findings may not be clear. If the 
•animal must be killed, do not injure 
the bruin and thereby interfere with 
laboratory examination of the head. 

Wounds from venomous animals 
are of another sort. Restrict activity 
at once if bitten by a venomous 
snake. Quickly wrap a constriction 
band around the limb just above the 
bite. Make a few longitudinal cuts 
through the skin at points where the 
poison most likely is deposited. 
Crosscuts intersecting the longitudi¬ 
nal ones should not be deep lest ten¬ 
dons be severed. Then apply suction 
with the mouth or a suction cup dur¬ 
ing transport to a medical facility. 
Ice applications interspersed with the 
suction may help. Keep the limb 


lowered. For the sting of a venom¬ 
ous scorpion, wrap a constriction 
band around the affected part, usu¬ 
ally a finger, for five minutes and 
then release it. Meanwhile apply ice, 
continuing until medical help is ob¬ 
tained. Tarantulas of this country 
are not venomous; imported ones 
may be. First aid for bites by the 
venomous ones and by black widow 
spiders is the same as for poisonous 
scorpions. In case of bee sting, re¬ 
move the poison sac with a tweezers 
without emptying it into the tissue 
—for these injuries as well as for 
the bites or stings of mosquitoes, 
chiggers, and the like, palliative 
measures include the application of 
ammonia water, cold cream, or 
baking-soda paste. Immediate ap¬ 
plication of ice gives much relief. 
Good insect repellents are available 
too. 

ANKLE, a joint between the leg and 
the foot, formed by the junction 
of the lower ends of the tibia and 
fibula, the bones of the lower leg, 
and the astragalus, or anklebone, in 
the foot. 

Sprained ankle. Sudden twisting of 
the foot may stretch one of the many 
ligaments which connect various 
bones in the ankl e area, and produce 
local bleeding, swelling, and extreme 
tenderness. Immediate application of 
cold compresses is helpful to reduce 
swelling, bleeding, and pain during 
the first twenty-four hours. Strapping 
the ankle with elastic bandages or 
adhesive tape relieves tension and 
mobility of the joint and hastens 
healing. Daily submersion in hot 



__ «^jt fc*j,av JiOO 

soothing. The latest treatment in¬ 
cludes injection of novocaine solu¬ 
tions for relief of pain, as well as 
hyaluronidase to decrease swelling, 
to permit earlier use of the foot. 
Painful ankle. A painful ankle may 
occur with a sprain, fracture of ankle 
bones, arthritis, or gout. 

Swollen ankle. Swollen ankle may 
occur in many conditions, especially 
in pregnancy, kidney disease, heart 
disease, and in overweight persons, 
because of impaired circulation. 
Many persons, women especially, de¬ 
velop swollen ankles in hot weather. 
See also joints and joint dis¬ 
orders; SPRAINS. 

4NODYNE, any agent that will re- 
ieve pain. See also analgesia; 

ANESTHESIA. 

VNOREXIA, the scientific term for 
OSS of appetite. 

ANOREXIA NERVOSA, a condi- 
lon most frequently found in young 
eurotic women, is characterized by 
pronounced aversion to food, due to 
hysterical condition. In extreme 
ises, the loss of weight may be so 
•eat that death may ensue if the 
alady is not corrected in time. Both 
ychological and medical treatment 
e necessary. 

XOSMIA, complete loss of the 
ase of smell. It may be permanent 
temporary, depending on whether 
not the olfactory nerves are darn¬ 
ed or destroyed completely beyond 
pe of healing. Partial loss of the 
ise of smell is hyposmia, and the 
s of smell in one nostril only is 


nemianosmia. An excessive response 
to odors is known as hyperosmia. 

Loss of the sense of smeU may be 
the result of a mental state, as in 
hysteria. In some instances of hal¬ 
lucination, the person imagines that 
he smells certain odors not actually 
present. Treatment of anosmia due to 
mental causes is difficult. 

Defects of the sense of smell may 
be caused by dryness of the mucous 
membranes of the nose, by infection, 
injury, obstruction, deterioration of 
the nasal tissue, or by action of drugs. 
Certain diseases of the brain, brain 
injury, or brain tumor may also pro¬ 
duce anosmia. 

Tests to determine the presence of 
a sense of smell are made by releas¬ 
ing certain odors and noting the 
responses. Adjustment to the loss of 
a sense of smell is usually not too 
difficult. See also olfactory sense. 

ANOXEMIA, a lack of the normal 
amount of oxygen in the blood, due 
to high altitudes, low partial pressure 
of oxygen in anesthesia, cardiac 
failure, or strangling. 

ANTABUSE, a recently developed 
drug used in the treatment of alco¬ 
holics to produce a distaste for alco¬ 
hol. When Antabuse is administered 
to an alcoholic, extreme discomfort, 
severe nausea, vomiting, and flushing 
develop, with intolerance to alcohol. 

Antabuse should never be given to 
a person who is intoxicated, nor 
should it be given without the full 
knowledge and consent of the person. 
The drug is best used in conjunction 
with psychotherapy. See also alco¬ 
holism. 



ANTACID, a substance that relieves 
acidity and neutralizes acids. 

ANTENATAL denotes the time from 
conception to delivery. 

ANTEPARTUM refers to any oc¬ 
currence or condition that takes place 
before the baby is bom. 

ANTHRAX, a malignant carbuncle, 
is a serious infectious disease which 
not only attacks animals such as 
cattle and sheep but is also trans¬ 
mitted by them to human beings. The 
germ, found most often in the re¬ 
cently ejected excrement of animals 
or men, or in their hair or skin, is 
transmitted to or may enter the body 
through a wound, scratch, or insect 
bite, or through inhalation. The most 
frequent victims of anthrax are 
farmers, butchers, veterinarians, and 
hide workers. Anthrax of the lung 
is often referred to as “wool sorters’ 
disease.” 

The prevention of anthrax among 
human beings is best achieved by 
protecting the animals. Failing this, 
obvious precautions are necessary, 
especially in places where men work 
with animals or with the products of 
animals. Clothing, such as overalls 
and rubber aprons, which protects 
the skin should be worn. Persons 
sorting hair or wool should wear 
breathing devices which will protect 
them from the inhalation of danger¬ 
ous substances. Workers are advised 
to cleanse their hands with disin¬ 
fectants when their work is done. 
Some precautions are merely those 
which any efficient industrial man¬ 
agement insists upon: general sanita¬ 
tion, attention to skin lesions of 


workers, disinfection of dangeroi 
wastage before it leaves the factor 
and effective ventilation. Exhau 
fans are particularly essential to can 
away any dangerous substances whic 
might exist in the atmosphere. 

The first symptom of anthrax i 
painful itching. Several hours latei 
somewhere on the body, an inflamei 
pimple or boil develops which be 
comes hard, has a purple center, an( 
is surrounded by a zone of red. As tht 
boil swells, it produces a thick anc 
bloody pus at its center, and at th« 
same time the adjacent lymph glands 
swell and the veins become inflamed, 
The first boil is followed by many 
others. Eventually gangrene may de¬ 
velop in the infected tissue. Simul¬ 
taneously the pemon is likely to suffer 
from a general weakness, together 
with chilliness, dismclmation to eat, 
nausea, and a high temperature. The 
most serious form of this disease is 
anthrax of the lungs. 

Serums have been developed which 
are useful against this malady. The 
sulfa drugs and other antibiotics have 
also been valuable, especially in the 
control of supplementary infections. 
Unfortunately, because of the rarity 
of the disease, the diagnosis some¬ 
times is made too late to counteract 
the infection and save the patient. 

ANTIBIOTICS, substances produced 
during the growth of molds or bac¬ 
teria which inhibit or kill other 
bacteria that cause disease. 

The search for effective and non¬ 
toxic antibiotics is unceasing. Molds 
and bacteria are grown and examined 
for antibiotic substances by bacteri- 



ologists and mycologists. Chemists 
then purify these substances and pre¬ 
pare them as concentrates which in 
turn are tested in animal experiments 
by pathologists to determine their 
potency and toxicity before they can 
be employed for human use. 

Since the development of penicil¬ 
lin in 1942, following its accidental 
discovery in 1929 during an experi¬ 
ment by Sir Alexander Fleming, the 
English bacteriologist, thousands of 
antibiotic substances have been 
isolated and studied. Of these, ap¬ 
proximately nineteen are now being 
used for therapeutic purposes. Among 
the significant ones are bacitracin 
and tyrothricin, and “broad spec¬ 
trum” antibiotics, so-called because 
they are effective against many dif¬ 
ferent types of infectious diseases, 
which include penicillin, Aureomycin, 
Terramycin, streptomycin, Chloro¬ 
mycetin, Erythroticin Kanamycin 
and tetracyclines. These are used 
in the treatment of many bacterial, 
viral, and fungus diseases. 

Antibiotics have been employed 
with dramatic success in rheumatic 
fever, bacterial endocarditis, syphilis, 
tuberculosis, pneumonia, and many 
staphylococcic infections. However, 
in some instances they have produced 
undesirable reactions, such as diar¬ 
rhea, nausea, vomiting, and ab¬ 
dominal cramps, and may also cause 
serious damage to the kidneys or 
3ther organs. When used indiscrimi- 
aately, antibiotics may lead to growth 
vithin the body of new strains of 
previously harmless bacteria which 
jecome drug-resistant and thus ex- 
)ose the patient to residual infect 


tions. Most doctors believe that anti¬ 
biotics should not be used in 
conditions, such as minor colds and 
sore throats, which are readily con¬ 
trolled by simple remedies. The 
patient’s response to antibiotics 
should not be endangered or his im¬ 
munity to disease decreased by the 
use of antibiotics for minor infec¬ 
tions. See also bacterial endocardi¬ 
tis; MEDICINE chest; PNEUMONIA; 
RHEUMATIC FEVER; STREPTOCOCCUS’, 

ANTIBODY, a substance, natural or 
artificial, introduced to serve as a 
protection against infections or for¬ 
eign proteins in the body fluids. An¬ 
tagonistic to factors which are in¬ 
jurious to the animal organisms, an 
antibody can destroy bacteria ade¬ 
quately and counteract poisons that 
cause infections. Diphtheria and 
other antitoxins are typical anti¬ 
bodies. See also antitoxin; blood 
types; gamma globulin. 

ANTICOAGULANT, a substance or 
condition which opposes or prevents 
coagulation or clotting. See also 

COAGULATION. 

ANTIDOTE, any agent used to pre¬ 
vent or to counteract the effect of a 
poison. There are specific antidotes 
for different poisons; for a full dis¬ 
cussion, see poisoning. 

ANTIFEBRIN, or acetanilid, a drug 
derived from aniline by the action of 
acetic acid upon it. Antifebrin has 
been used to lower fever, but more 
often serves to relieve pain and is 
therefore one of the ingredients fre¬ 
quently found in headache remedies. 
See also acetanilid. 


52 



1 i^cr I ii 


ANTIHISTAMiNIC DRUGS, syn¬ 
thetic substances, used to alleviate 
allergic conditions by diminishing the 
action of histamine. 

Antihistaminic drugs are best 
known as ingredients of advertised 
cold remedies. The claim that colds 
can be avoided by taking such reme¬ 
dies shortly after the appearance of 
the first symptoms of a cold has not 
as yet been scientifically established. 
However, in combination with aspi¬ 
rin or phenacetin, or sprayed into j;he 
nose with camphor, antihistaminic 
preparations are useful in treating 
colds which begin with a running 
nose due to allergy. They also may 
relieve stuflSness, irritated eyes, and 
similar symptoms. 

Antihista m inic drugs are not a 
cure; they may obscure the real 
symptoms and are occasionally harm¬ 
ful. See also allergy. 

ANTIMONY, a metallic crystalline 
substance, symbolized by Sb from the 
ancient word Stibium, present in 
many minerals. It is extensively used 
in the manufacture of alloy metals. 

Formerly a mainstay in medical 
practice, salts of antimony are 
now less frequently used. They 
diminish the functional activity of 
the heart and the arteries, in which 
ease they act as depressants; they 
increase perspiration, (as diapho¬ 
retics), and they induce vomiting, (as 
emetics). 

Antimony is effective in cases of 
infestation by flukes, which are flat 
parasitic worms. 

ANTISEPTICS, substances that hin¬ 
der the growth and activity of micro¬ 
organisms, or germs. Antiseptic 


agents differ from those which a 

as disinfectants, germicides, or dei 
dorants. A disinfectant or germicic 
kills bacteria which cause infectioi 
diseases; a deodorant destroys ( 
covers disagreeable odors. Substanc( 
like chloride of lime can be used fc 
either purpose. 

In surgery, the use of antiseptics ; 
essential, especially in disinfecting it 
struments and other materials use 
in operations. In first aid for ac 
cidental wounds and in the care o 
contaminated or suppurating wounds 
antiseptics prevent infection fron 
spreading in the body. 

Various antiseptics may be used t( 
disinfect a wound. Tincture of iodini 
is recommended in first aid. Anti 
septic dyes, like tincture of Mer 
thiolate, that can be painted on cuts 
and wounds are as powerful as iodine 
and less likely to burn or damage 
living tissue. Other antiseptics include 
Mercurochrome, saturated solutioc 
of boric acid, Metaphen, Zephiran, 
and hexylresorcinol solution. Hydro¬ 
gen peroxide is also an effective anti¬ 
septic but should not be applied to a 
fresh wound because it may bring 
about clotting or other undesirable 
effects. Carbolic acid is a dangerous 
poison and should be used only on 
the advice of a doctor. 

Sulfa preparations and antibiotics 
are effective on the skin against 
microorganisms, but should be used 
under a doctor’s supervision because 
of possible side effects, including al¬ 
lergic reactions and the danger of 
making germs resistant to the drugs. 
See also boric acid; medicine 
chest; poisoning; wounds. 



ANTITOXIN, a substance which 
counteracts the effect of toxins or 
poisons in the body produced by 
harmful organisms, such as bacteria 
that cause disease. Antitoxins may be 
developed by the body itself or by the 
blood of an animal which has been 
injected with a toxin. Some of the 
blood is then withdrawn and the 
serum containing the antitoxin sepa¬ 
rated from it. This serum or antitoxin 
may then be injected into a person 
suffering from the particular infec¬ 
tion. 

Antitoxins are specific for certain 
infections. Each bacterial toxin may 
be counteracted only by the antitoxin 
effective against it, not by any other 
which may be potent against other 
disease-causing toxins. 

Diphtheria antitoxin, specific both 
for curative and preventive purposes, 
is regarded as one of the greatest of 
all medical discoveries. Moreover, 
improved methods are now in gen¬ 
eral use. One of these consists of in¬ 
jection of diphtheria toxoid, a mix¬ 
ture of toxin and antitoxin which 
causes the body to develop its own 
antitoxin without actually suffering 
from the acute disease itself. 

Antitoxins are also available 
against botulism, scarlet fever, teta¬ 
nus, staphylococcal infections and 
snakebite. They have also been effec¬ 
tive in erysipelas, meningitis, and 
epidemic sore throat. Penicillin and 
the sulfonamide drugs have provided 
such powerful chemical remedies 
against a number of these infections 
that many antitoxins are no longer 
used. See also immunity; immuniza¬ 
tion. 


ANTRUM, a cavity or hollow space, 
usually within a bone. Most fre¬ 
quently it refers to the maxillary 



Anfrwm—The farge sinuses af fhe sides of 
the nose in fhe jaws are called maxillary 
sinuses. They are located in a bone known 
as the maxilla^ which is the upper jawbone. 

sinus, one of a pair of sinuses, in the 
upper jaw. Among others are the 
mastoid antrum, the pyloric and the 
dental antrums. See also sinuses. 

ANURIA, the suppression of urine 
by the kidneys, caused by an ob¬ 
struction in the urinary tract or a 
lack of renal function. 

ANUS, the extremity of the rectum 
and the outlet of the bowel. 

ANXIETY, a state of mental dis¬ 
tress, usually unconscious, that may 
contain feelings of anticipated help¬ 
lessness, humiliation, guilt, and 
worthlessness. Anxiety is one of the 
commonest psychopathological 






APHAS 


symptoms of a neurosis. Often the 
mental distress is low in intensity, 
but it may be almost continuous. 
The person suffering from anxiety 
may feel overconcern about practi¬ 
cally everything, both important and 
unimportant. This has been called 
“free-floating” anxiety. In such a 
case the person may claim that he 
cannot think clearly and his con¬ 
centration is poor. There may be 
feelings of weakness, perspiration 
may be profuse, and pupils may 
enlarge. 

Anxiety may be diverted to one 
or more organs of the body, appear¬ 
ing in the individual in the guise of 
a physical symptom. When mental 
distress is turned into a physical 
manifestation, it is called conversion 
hysteria. 

Anxiety may also manifest itself 
in a specific fear or phobia, which is 
completely out of proportion to the 
actual danger. Thus, fear of being 
left alone in a room may represent 
unconscious anxiety over being aban¬ 
doned and helpless. Here the un¬ 
conscious conflict of the mind is 
related to something specific in the 
environment. Anxiety dreams are 
common, often resulting in night¬ 
mares. While the dreamer is aware 
of the content of the dream, the 
unconscious mental distress is ob¬ 
scured. As in all methods of dealing 
with anxiety, the person attempts to 
protect himself from the real causes 
by withdrawing the conflict from 
awareness into his unconscious. 

Different from the free-floating 
anxiety described above is the anx¬ 


iety attack, whereby the individr 
is thrown into a sudden state of i 
tense anxiety which may last a fe 
minutes or less and then subsid( 
Such attacks are frequently the cor 
plaint of mentally disturbed peopl 
During such attacks the patient m: 
be afraid of dying, or of havii 
heart disease or cancer. Often he 
in the grip of anxiety without knov 
ing why, only that the “walls ai 
closing in on him,” that he is heli 
less in a gigantic, threatening work 
Anxiety attacks are often accon 
panied by bodily symptoms, such £ 
palpitation, rapid heart rate, diff 
culty in breathing, perspiratioi 
coldness of the extremities, heac 
aches, etc. 

Treatment of anxiety may involve 
extensive psychotherapy in severi 
neurosis. The therapist recognize 
that the symptoms are the end prod 
uct of the patient’s mental conflicts 
and focuses his attention on th( 
patient’s life problems, helping hirr 
to reorganize his personality so tha 
as the patient grows stronger, his 
symptoms will disappear withoui 
primary attention. See also emo¬ 
tional health; fear; mental de¬ 
pression; STRESS. 

AORTA, the largest blood vesse 
coming from the heart. It distributes 
blood to every part of the bod> 
through its system of arteries. 

APHASIA, an organic condition 
caused by lesions in the cortex of the 
brain which produces loss or impair¬ 
ment of the capacity to use words aS 
symbols of ideas. 



RIGHT CAROTID- 

VENA CAVA 
BRACHIAL - 
INTERCOSTAL- 


RENAL — 

RADIAL—5 
ULNAR-76 


PALMER ARCH I 



WfEMPORAL 

r.—LEFT CAROTID 


-—ARCH OF AORTA 

-—HEART 

•—THORACIC AORTA 

- . .COELIC AXIS AND 
i MESENTERIC 


: ILIAC 


-FEMORAL 


TIBIAL 


DORSALIS PEDIS-- 


lorta— The aorta is the largest artery of the body. As it projects up out of the heart if makes 
n arch to the left and courses downward behind the heart to the abdomen where it branches 
ff into two vessels, one extending down each leg. The arch is called the "arch of the aorta." 
arge vessels branch off the arch and go to the head, neck and down the arms. The aorta 
srries oxygenated blood from the heart to all parts of the body. 


PHONIA, loss of voice because of so that drugs which 'release inhibi- 
ysteria or peripheral lesion. tions may act as aphrodisiacs. Cer¬ 

tain substances which have an ir- 
PHRODISIAC, any preparation ritating effect when excreted may 
• agent which stimulates sexual de- stimulate congestion of the sex or- 
re. Actually desire is mostly mental gans. See also canthawdes. 

5 









APOPLEXY 


APPENDlCm 


APOPLEXY. In apoplexy, or 
“stroke” or cerebral hemorrhage, an 
artery in the brain either ruptures and 
bleeds or is blocked. The victim is 
apt to lose consciousness and some 
part of the body is paralyzed, at 
least temporarily. Apoplexy occurs 
most frequently in persons whose 
arteries have deteriorated with age or 
who have high blood pressure. Age 
tends to bring rising blood pressure 
and degenerative change in the 
arteries. As the proportion of elderly 
people in the United States increases, 
the proportion of people susceptible 
to apoplexy also increases and there¬ 
fore apoplexy has become a leading 
cause of death. When younger per¬ 
sons have apoplexy it is frequently 
the result of a blood clot from else¬ 
where in the body obstructing a 
blood vessel which serves the brain. 
This obstruction has the same effect 
as an actual hemorrhage of blocking 
the flow of blood in the brain. 

Apoplexy occurs in various ways. 
Especially with older persons, apo¬ 
plexy may take place during a regular 
nightly sleep, with nb apparent ex¬ 
ternal cause. Sometimes apoplexy is 
associated with an emotional out¬ 
burst, a sudden intense effort or acute 
stress. Without warning, a person 
may coUapse suddenly. Partial pa¬ 
ralysis is a typical consequence, re¬ 
gardless of the way apoplexy occurs. 

Emergency assistance to a victim 
of apoplexy begins by putting him to 
bed immediately. He should lie supine 
and if he is unconscious be placed 
on his side. If he is placed on his 
back during unconsciouness, his 
tongue may fall back into his throat. 


interfere with breathing, and cau: 
strangulation. A doctor should 1 
summoned promptly. 

As long as the stricken person 
unconscious, fluids and foods must t 
given artificially; liquids will have t 
be injected and food injected throug 
tubes into the veins. These measure 
and others are prescribed and ac 
ministered by the doctor. 

The extent of paralysis can b 
established only after the person ha 
regained consciousness, and some 
times a long period of time mus 
elapse before the full extent of thi 
paralysis is determined. Paralysis du( 
to a temporary condition, such ai 
pressure on a nerve, rather than tc 
actual destruction of nerve tissue wil 
disappear with recovery. The body, il 
adequate care is provided, tends tc 
mend such damage and to restore 
power of movement lost for tem¬ 
porary reasons. A person crippled by 
apoplexy can be rehabilitated in most 
instances if the proper treatment is 
begun at the right time. The patient 
should always be handled very care¬ 
fully and gently, never abruptly 
pushed or jerked into position. His 
position must be changed every few 
hours in order to prevent the forma¬ 
tion of bed sores and ulcers and the 
skin should be kept perfectly clean 
at all times, including a complete 
bath each day. See also chorea; 
embolism; paralysis; thrombosis. 

APPENDICITIS, inflammation of 
the appendix, more properly known 
as the vermiform appendix, a finger- 
shaped sac three to six inches long 
which proieCtS from th<> Inrnf Knuxot 




I \ 

/ I 
t \ 


Small 

intestine 


■Large 

intestine 


■Appendix 


in the lower right quarter of the ab¬ 
domen. 

Infection and inflammation of the 
appendix are potentially serious be¬ 
cause the infection may spread to the 
peritoneum, the membranous tissue 
which lines the abdomen. Acute peri¬ 
tonitis, or inflammation of the peri¬ 
toneum, is a grave development and 
may be fatal unless treated promptly. 

Peritonitis may result from ap¬ 
pendicitis in at least two ways. The 
peritoneum is shaped to fit over the 
appendix, just as a glove covers a 
finger, and is thus in close contact 
with it. Accordingly infection of the 
appendix may spread to the peri¬ 
toneum simply by contact. More¬ 
over, if an inflamed appendix is left 
untreated, it may rupture or develop 
gangrene. In either case, masses of 
infected matter will be discharged 
into the peritoneal cavity. 

These possibilities demand that 
the condition be accorded immediate 
attention by a physician. Delay often 
unnecessarily permits the develop¬ 
ment of complications, renders treat¬ 
ment more difficult, and may possibly 
endanger life. Attempts to diagnose 
and treat the symptoms of appendici¬ 
tis without a physician, by ascribing 
the symptoms to a gastrointestinal 
disturbance and administering a 
cathartic or laxative, may have seri¬ 
ous consequences. Abdominal pain 
should never be treated with a 
cathartic or laxative without the 
cause of the pain being fiurst estab¬ 
lished. 


Appendicitis— The appendix is a small sac 

attached to the bowel which seems to cause 
trouble out of all proportion to its size. 





MrrENDIClTlS 


APPENDICIT 


Appendicitis usually begins with a 
sick feeling, accompanied by nausea, 
lack of appetite, and at first a rather 
diffuse abdo m inal soreness. Vomiting 
may occur, and a rise in temperature 
is likely. Gradually the pain tends to 
concentrate on the right side of the 
abdomen below the navel and the 
muscles in that region tighten when 
pressed in examination. 

Symptoms indicative of appendici¬ 
tis can actually arise from nothing 
more serious than accumulation of 
gas or solid matter in a part of the 
bowel. However, ordinarily these 
symptoms disappear with elimination 
from the bowel. If they persist, the 
doctor should be promptly consulted. 
He will determine whether or not 
appendicitis has actually occurred. 
Examination of the blood will usually 
show abnormal numbers of white 
cells if the appendix is infected. 

Diagnosis is not always easy be¬ 
cause of the variety of difficulties 

incision—In the operation for appendicitis 
the skin has been disinfected and an in¬ 
cision is made down to the muscle. The 
incision is on the right side a few inches 
from the groin. 





which may manifest similar sym 
toms. This is especially true of tl 
resemblance between the early stag 
of appendicitis and, in some cases, 
early pneumonia. In early pneumoni 



Swrgicai Fseld—Sterile towels are brough 
to the edges of the cut so that only the sur 
gical field is exposed. This prevents con 
tamination. After the skin and fat are pullec 
back by retractors, the first layer of muscle 
is exposed. The muscle is cut in the direction 
of its fibers. 



Retr0cfl!ig Mpscle — The outer layer of 
muscle is also retracted, bringing the second 
layer into view. The fibers of the second 
layer run in a different direction than those 
of the first layer. Again a cut is made along 
the grain of the muscle. 



#- 1.1 r c I 11 C 



Tlie Closed Wound — The appearance of 
the closed wound With the skin edges 
placed together the scar will be minima! 



ippendix—The appendix will be sent to 
ie laboratory to be examined by the 
athologist. The appendix measures about 
iree inches long. 


cannot empty its contents. An ab¬ 
scess fonns, the swelling increases, 
and the accumulating infected and 
lymphatic matter within the tube can¬ 
not escape. The appendix may then 
burst or become gangrenous. Gan¬ 
grene is the atrophy of the tissues 
locally affected. 

Sudden relief after a period of pain 
should be considered a potential dan¬ 
ger signal rather than a sign of im¬ 
provement, for it may signify that 
perforation has occurred or that gan¬ 
grene has begun. 

Appendicitis is a sigmficant threat 
to health in the United States. It 
ranks fifteenth among causes of 
death, and kills sixteen thousand per¬ 
sons annually. If children below the 
age of fifteen are eliminated from 
these statistics, appendicitis becomes 
the eighth or ninth cause of death. 
See also pemtonitis. 

APPETITE, the recurring and usually 
natural desire for food. A distinction 
must be made between appetite and 
hunger. Hunger pangs result from 
contractions of an empty stomach 
and are rarely felt by anyone who 
regularly eats adequate amounts of 
food. Appetite arises with the custom¬ 
ary intervals of eating and may be 
influenced by numerous external and 
internal phenomena. Eating is one 
of the most firmly fixed of all habits, 
and appetite is usually a longing for 
something one wants to eat at a time 
when one habitually has or expects 
food. Ordinarily a good appetite is 
considered a sign of health. 

Appetite, however, can become ex¬ 
cessive or subject to distorted im- 



«VjfWCUUi humor 


ARCHES, FALL 


pulses. Occasionally people suffering 
from specific disorders, such as dia¬ 
betes, gastric ulcers, or chronic gas¬ 
tritis, develop appetites out of pro¬ 
portion to their needs. In pregnancy 
or hysteria, unusual and specialized 
cravings may develop for particular 
kinds of foods, or even for injurious 
substances. 

A close connection may exist be¬ 
tween appetite and individual psy¬ 
chological experience. Children, for 
example, are apt to develop cravings 
without realizing the cause. Eating 
may be a form of compensation for 
a major loss or disappointment; or 
a means of securing attention from 
adults who otherwise might not notice 
the child. Some children develop un¬ 
accustomed appetite from significant 
new events taking place about them, 
such as the birth of a new baby. 

A person who has duodenal ulcer 
seems to have a special form of ap¬ 
petite. His pain is apt to rise and fall 
with the stomach’s desire for food. 
In such cases, eating tends to relieve 
the pain, at least temporarily. 

Diminution or loss of appetite ac¬ 
companies many disordered condi¬ 
tions, and is usually one of the symp¬ 
toms of tuberculosis and anemia. 
Loss of appetite and refusal to eat 
anything is known medically as 
anorexia nervosa. Ordinarily this 
disease is related to some form of 
emotional instability and is observed 
more often in women than in men. 

Appetite can be artificially de¬ 
creased by taking such drugs as 
Benzedrine and Dexedrine. These 
drugs are sometimes prescribed for 


weight reduction, but should be tai 
only on the advice of a doctor. 

Investigation indicates that sm 
amounts of cocktails and other ale 
holic drinks arouse or increase i 
petite, although they hinder t 
stomach contractions associated wj 
hunger. See also anorexia . 

AQUEOUS HUMOR, the fluid 
the front chamber of the eye, fc 
tween the cornea and the lens. T1 
transparent substance is almc 
totally water. 

ARACHNODACTYLY, deriw 
from the Greek words for spider ai 
finger, a condition in which the fi 
gers and sometimes the toes are a 
normally long and thin. This abno 
mality has a hereditary tendency. 

ARGYROL, a proprietary antisepti 
drug which contains about 20 pe 
cent silver and proteins found in eg 
yolk. It is used to control and countej 
act inflammations of membranes ths 
are secreting or contain mucus. 

ARCHES, FALLEN, are due to 
breakdown of the natural arch of th 
foot which is an elastic spring tha 
supports the weight of the entin 
body. This arch, made up of numer 
ous bones held in place by a series o 
ligaments and muscles, is a curvec 
structure resembling an arc. Flat feet 
a common complaint, may be causec 
by the natural weakness of the arch 
but usually result from certain oc 
cupations, injury, or obesity. The 
condition may be corrected or bene¬ 
fited by wearing proper shoes or arch 



effects of this conditioa on the blood 
pressure and the circulation of local 
areas of the body. Generalized high 
blood pressure ttooughout the body 
is not caused by hardening of the 
arteries, although the two conditions 
tend to be closely related. 


Syringe 

hulb 

(heart) 


Glass Heart heat 
tube flozv- 

(rigid intermittent 
arteries) j 

\ 

\ 

Capillary 



DistensiMe Continuous 
tulfe flow 

(elastic 
arteriesj 


Arteriosclerosis-Mechanism showing how 
hardened blood vessels increase blood pres¬ 
sure. Normal blood pressure is dependent 
on many factors. Primarily, the energy of 
the heart action and the elasticity of the 
walls of the arteries influence pressure. In¬ 
elastic or rigid arteries interfere with the 
proper flow oithe blood, build up pressure 
and force the heart to pump harder. 


The commonest symptoms of 
hardened arteries are drowsiness, 
periods of giddiness, headaches, and 
other manifestations of high blood 
pressure. Interference with circula¬ 
tion may cause cramps in the legs, 
which give them a bluish tinge. The 
most serious form of arteriosclerosis 
occurs when the blood vessels of the 
brain and heart are involved. 

The specific causes of the harden¬ 
ing process within the arteries is not 
as yet fully understood and is the 
subject of much medical research. 
One theory, partly home out by 
experimental work with animals. 


places responsibility on excessive con¬ 
sumption of fats. Another suggests 
that overindulgence of tobacco and 
alcohol somehow stimulate the con¬ 
dition, although this has never been 
proved scientifically. 

Treatment for arteriosclerosis is 
generally limited to establishing the 
patient’s comfort and peace of mind 
as much as possible, and encouraging 
him to take good care of himself. 
The patient is urged to relax and 
eliminate as much as possible the 
stresses and strains of daily living, 
since excitement or intense emotion 
may stimulate a greater flow of blood 
than the hardened arteries can ac¬ 
commodate, with the possibility of 
severe consequences from rupture and 
bleeding. A low-fat diet is often rec¬ 
ommended, and heat treatment, 
either baths or exposure to hot air, 
has been found useful. Several new 
drugs are available which often prove 
beneficial when prescribed. 

ARlHRinS, inflammation of the 
joints. At least seven million people 
in the United States are afficted by 
various forms of arthritis, causing 
more days lost from work than any 
other disability except nervous and 
mental diseases. 

Innumerable forms of inflamed 
joints affect people, and only a doctor 
can differentiate them. Arthritis may 
be caused by infection, by degenera¬ 
tion of joint tissues coincident with 
overweight or old age, or by de¬ 
posits of uric acid crystals within 
the joint space, as in gout. Arthritis 
may follow injury or be associated 
wititi allergy to medicine or to food. 


66 



ARTHRITIS 


ARTHRITIS 


Occasionally joint pain may indicate 
tumor growth or inflammation of the 
nerves surrounding a joint 

Arthritis due to infection of a joint 
resulting from tuberculosis, syphilis, 
typhoid fever, or gonorrhea is not as 
common now as in former years, be¬ 
cause treatment of these diseases is 
now more effective. Joint pains due 
to aUergy to penicUlin or other drugs 
can be relieved by simple medications 
with antihistamines such as Pyri- 
benzamine, Benadryl, or Neohetra- 
mine. Inflammation due to gout is 
treated by drugs such as colchicine, 
Benemid, ButazoUdin, or Anturan. 
When the condition is caused by old 
injuries, surgery may occasionally be 
helpful in mollifying the scar tissue 
responsible for the pain. Neuritis and 
neuralgia, mimicking true arthritis, 
are sometimes relieved by large doses 
of the B vitamins. 

Arthritis in women may be re¬ 
lated to the function of the sex glands 
or ovaries. In postmenopausal arthri¬ 
tis, which occurs after ovarian ac- 

Artliritis — The shaded areas on the ends 
of the bones show the linings of cartilage 
which reduce friction and are (ike bearings 
in the movable joints of the body. In some 
individuals the joint cartilage does not sus¬ 
tain well under stress and strain and de¬ 
generative changes take place. Age, poor 
posture and joint injuries may also be con¬ 
tributing causes. The cartilage becomes thin 
and wears out. Bony growths develop from 
the surface of the bones, and the ends of 
the joint bones are in direct contact. Motion 
in the affected joint is limited and pain is 
present. The shoulders, end joints of fingers, 
spine, hips and knees are areas frequently 
involved in degenerative arthritis. Although 
cartilage cannot be replaced, relief of pain, 
heat, hydrotherapy, massage, rest, and a 
certain amount of exercise are valuable 
measures in treatment and in preventing 
further degeneration. 




tivity has ceased within the body, re¬ 
lief is often obtained with small doses 
of sex hormones. 

Rheumatoid arthritis is somewhat 
more complex as well as more fre¬ 
quent than the types mentioned. 
While the exact cause is not known, 
certain factors have been established 
that definitely relate to the develop¬ 
ment of rheumatoid arthritis. Over¬ 
fatigue, shock, injury, prolonged 
exposure to dampness or cold have 
all been thought to be associated with 
the development of this type of in¬ 
flammation. Allergy has been postu¬ 
lated as a cause, as well as hormone 
defects. Rheumatoid arthritis often 
begins with pain and stiffness in a 
single joint months before other joints 
become affected. It strikes the fingers, 
hands, wrists, and knees primarily, 
but may also affect the bones of the 
back and the hips. The fingers de¬ 
velop a typical “sausage-like” ap¬ 
pearance in which the middle joint 
of the fingers becomes swollen and 
tender. The toes are seldom involved, 
as opposed to gouty arthritis in which 
the great toe is commonly affected. 
Nodules may occur under the skin in 
about 10 per cent of cases, usually 
located around the elbows, wrists, 
fingers, and occasionally the ankles. 
They vary in size from a small pea 
to a large walnut, appearing and dis¬ 
appearing without apparent cause. 

Although true rheumatoid arthritis 
tends to be chronic, sudden complete 
relief of pain and stiffness may occur 
for months or years at a time. In 
mild cases the disability may be 
scarcely noticed, but in others the 
victim may become bedridden. 


In older people, and in younger 
ones who are extremely overweight, 
osteoarthritis or degenerative arthritis 
may occur. The average age of on¬ 
set of this type is between fifty and 
seventy, whereas rheumatoid arthritis 
usually strikes before forty and may 
affect children. In osteoarthritis the 
signs of inflammation are few. The 
symptoms of pain and disability are 
due to degeneration or wearing away 
of cartilage within the joint and, 
unlike rheumatoid arthritis which 
may affect almost any joint, the knees, 
back, and neck are most commonly 
involved. Swelling may occur in the 
last joint of each finger, but nodes 
are not found under the skin. 
Whereas rheumatoid inflammation 
tends to produce permanent de¬ 
formity of the joints, osteoarthritis 
does not usually have that effect. 

Many effective drugs and treat¬ 
ments are now available for persons 
afldicted with arthritis, depending on 
the particular type. For those suffer¬ 
ing from rheumatoid arthritis, the dis¬ 
covery of cortisone has been most 
encouraging. With the help of this 
drug, former cripples are able to lead 
active lives. Use of this hormone, 
isolated from the adrenal gland, fol¬ 
lowed the observation that pregnant 
women often are completely relieved 
of arthritis during pregnancy. Dr. E. 
C. Kendall of, the Mayo Clinic at¬ 
tempted to discover which element in 
the blood stream of pregnant women 
might be responsible for remission 
symptoms, and so cortisone was dis¬ 
covered. The results are often dra¬ 
matic. Patients with severe rheuma- 



ARTHRITl: 



GOOD POSITION POOR POSITION 

The functional position assumed by the arthritic patient sitting up in bei 

for occupational therapy. 



GOOD POSITION POOR POSITION 

The sitting position assumed in a suitable chair by the arthritic patient. 







toid arthritis may be relieved of pain 
and disability within a short time. 
ACTH, isolated from the pituitary, 
is another dramatically effective sub¬ 
stance. 

Unfortunately cortisone and 
ACTH do not curje arthritis. They 
do relieve disabling symptoms. These 
drugs must be taken indefinitely, al¬ 
ways under the supervision of the 
attending physician. Although the 
drugs were originally quite expensive, 
newer techniques of producing corti¬ 
sone may soon make arthritis treat¬ 
ment relatively inexpensive. 

Rest is essential for the patient 
with arthritis. While he can continue 
to work, he should rest for an hour 
or two, preferably lying down after 
lunch. In severe cases, hospitalization 
may be necessary. 

Diet may be significant. Patients 
are advised to eat a well-balanced, 
high-vitamin, high-protein diet, rich 
in vegetables and fruits. 

Reliance is especially placed on 
treating arthritis with dry heat, 
diathermy, massage, and exercises, in 
order to increase circulation to the 
joints, which may help retard the 
arthritic process and keep the sur¬ 
rounding muscles from becoming dis¬ 
torted or weakened. Many arthritis 
sufferers get considerable relief with 
hot wet compresses. Aspirin, salicylic 
acid, and mild sedatives are also 
beneficial in relieving arthritic pain, 
especially in milder cases that do not 
require cortisone. People with rheu¬ 
matic ailments feel better in warm 
dry climates, such as those of 
Arizona and New Mexico. Wet damp 
environments may aggravate the con¬ 
dition. 


Orthopedic surgeons can do much 
to improve the control of deformed 
bones and muscles in arthritis result¬ 
ing from any cause. This, plus the 
amazing advances made in the medi¬ 
cal care and treatment of arthritis, 
should brighten the hopes of every¬ 
one who suffers from this disease. 
See also gout. 

ARTIFICIAL LIMBS, known to the 
ancients as prostheses, which means 
artificial substitution for missing 
parts such as legs, arms, and den¬ 
tures. Improved prosthetic techniques 
have always followed wars. Today 
the stumps of limbs are being ef¬ 
fectively used by salvaging the func¬ 
tions of the remaining muscles in 
the stump to manipulate the artificial 
replacements. 

Many materials are suitable for the 
manufacture of artificial limbs. Wood, 
especially willow, has excellent quali¬ 
ties and is generally used. Aluminum, 
or duralumin has the advantage of 
lightness and is therefore preferable 
for weak and elderly people. Much 
work is being done with plastics but 
as yet is still largely in the experi¬ 
mental stage. The U. S. Army uses 
fiber in artificial limbs. The straps, 
belts, and foot coverings are made 
of leather, although it has certain dis¬ 
advantages. 

In artificially replacing a lower 
limb, the anJde and knee, and par¬ 
ticularly their sockets, are especially 
important. The socket determines the 
gait. The amputee must learn to use 
the artificial limb effectively, which 
involves control of his thigh and hip 
muscles. 

Because of its intricacy, the arti- 



AKIIMCIAL RSSPIKATiON 


ASPHYXIA 


ficial arm is used less than the arti¬ 
ficial leg. The type of replacement 
depends to a large degree upon the 
occupation of the amputee. Some 
find the peg arm, a stable jointless 
short arm, best since it can be fitted 
with a hook which gives great lifting 
power. The voluntary-control hand 
can hold a pend! and other small 
objects, and many utility appliances 
can be worn for special occupations, 
depending on the needs. A recent de¬ 
velopment is a hook operated by a 
chest or arm muscle. Through an 
operation known as dneplasty the 
control muscle is brought outside the 
body and covered by skin, and the 
device is then managed by contract¬ 
ing the muscle. Artificial hands that 
are purely cosmetic and without any 
functional purpose are also available. 

ARTIFICIAL RESPIRATION. See 

asphyxia; resuscitation. 

ASBESTOSIS, a lung disease which 
occurs among workers who inhale 
dust and other materials from as¬ 
bestos, a complex calcium magnesium 
silicate. Inhalation of asbestos fibers 
produces fibrous changes in the lungs 
which represent an attempt of the 
tissue of the lung to wall off the for¬ 
eign substance. 

Asbestos contains about 41 per 
cent iron oxide. The lungs react 
particularly to sUica and develop 
silicosis. Workers with asbestos also 
develop warty growths, called as¬ 
bestos corns, on the skin. See also 
INDUSTKIAL HEALTH. 

ASCARID, a type of long cylindrical 
parasite worm which sometimes in¬ 
fests the intestines. 


ASCORBIC ACID, or vitamin C, a 
white or slightly yellowish crystalline 
powder, soluble in water, is an 
organic compound found in citrus 
fruits and juices, fresh green leafy 
vegetables like kale and broccoli, 
potatoes, cantaloupe, tomatoes, and 
strawberries. Ascorbic acid is essential 
to the proper development of teeth 
and bones and the walls of capillary 
blood vessels. It is an aid in resisting 
infection and its absence leads to the 
once dreaded scurvy. Vitamin C is 
significant in infant diet, and is usu¬ 
ally added two weeks after birth. 
Children may need a supplementary 
form of this vitamm, but only on 
recommendation of a doctor. An 
adult male requires 75 mg. daily. See 
also VITAMINS. 

ASEPSIS, the absence of disease-pro¬ 
ducing bacteria. A wound is aseptic 
if it is cleansed and in a germ-free 
condition. See also antiseptics. 

ASPHYXIA, suffocation, coma or 
unconsciousness caused by depriva¬ 
tion of oxygen which results in ac¬ 
cumulation of carbon dioxide and 
fixed acids. When breathing stops, no 
matter what the cause, oxygen must 
be supplied artificially or uncon¬ 
sciousness will take place, followed 
shortly by death. 

The causes of asphyxia or suffoca¬ 
tion are many, the most frequent be¬ 
ing electric shock, gas poisoning, 
heart attacks, brain injuries, smoke, 
and drowning. Babies occasionally 
suffocate in their cribs. 

Many industries and nearly all 
cities and towns have first-aid teams 
which can handle cases that rennire 



#43rMTA!A 


artificial respiration. Many different 
machines have been developed to aid 
resuscitation, and they are available 
at most fire departments, police 
emergency services, and hospitals. 
Ambulances are equipped with emer¬ 
gency apparatus to give aid to the 
victim of asphyxia at the earliest 
moment as well as during the ride to 
the hospital for further treatment. 
However, time must not be lost 
waiting for equipment to be brought 
to an asphyxiated person. Artificial 
respiration should be started im¬ 
mediately. Few people survive after 
their lungs have gone without a 
change of air for more than twelve 
minutes. In drowning, this time is 
reduced to four minutes. 

A person who has drowned should 
be placed immediately in a horizontal 
position, back up, abdomen down, 
head turned to one side and resting 
on one hand to keep sand or water 
out of the mouth and eyes. If the 
body can lie slightly inclined down¬ 
ward on a slope of twenty to thirty 
degrees, elimination of fluid from the 
throat and the breathing tubes will 
be facilitated. Then alternate pressure 
and release on the chest is applied, 
forcing air in and out of the chest. 
Artificial respiration must be kept 
up, regardless of time, until mecfical 
help arrives. 

A form of artificial respiration 
known as the back pressure-arm lift 
was formerly recommended by the 
American National Red Cross and 
was adopted in the armed services 
and other organizations. Here the 
victim is placed face down in a prone 
position, with arms overhead and bent 


at the elbows, one hand upon the 
other, and the head turned to one side 
so that the cheek rests on the hands. 
The rescuer, on one or both knees 
at the victim’s head places his hands 
on the victim’s back, with thumbs 
just touching, and the heels of the 
hands just below a line running be¬ 
tween the victim’s armpits. The res¬ 
cuer rocks forward slowly, elbows 
straight, until his arms are almost 
vertical, exerting steady pressure 
upon the back. Next the rescuer 
rocks backward slowly and slides his 
hands to the victim’s aims, just 
above the elbows, which are raised 
until resistance is felt at the victim’s 
shoulders. Then the arms are 
dropped. This completes a full cycle, 
which is repeated twelve times a 
minute. 

Most recently recommended is 
mouth to mouth artificial respiration, 
and when available use of a tube 
through which air is blown and 
exhaled. This tube also keeps the 
tongue out of the way. 

Everything possible must be done 
to keep the asphyxiated person warm, 
because failure to do so may result 
in shock, which m turn may be 
responsible for death. 

Linesmen working on electric 
wires are shocked and asphyxiated 
frequently and a special technique 
has been developed to meet such an 
emergency. As the shocked linesman 
is probably hangiog by Ms safety 
belt, the rescuer pushes the victim’s 
head forward and circles the waist¬ 
line with his arms, placing one open 
hand on the abdomen and then 
grasping the first hand with the 



ASPIRATION 


ASTHMA 


fingers of the other to insure a 
firm grip. Pressure is applied on 
the abdomen inward and upward, 
then completely released. The cycle 
is repeated, making about eighteen 
to twenty pressures a minute. 

Rescuscitation should be attempted 
for long periods of time, with the 
hope that the period during which the 
person has been without air is less 
than has been originally estimated. 
See also resuscitation. 

ASPIRATION, the act of breathing; 
may also indicate the removal of 
fluids or gases from a cavity by suc¬ 
tion. 

ASPIRIN. See acetylsalicylic 
acid; medicine chest, Pain Re¬ 
lievers. 

ASTASIA, inability to stand in a 
normal manner because of lack of 
coordination. Astasia-abasia is a 
symptom of neurosis in which the 
affected person is apparently unable 
to walk or stand normally and seems 
to collapse when he tries to walk or 
stand. 

ASTHENIA, lack of vitality and loss 
of strength which creates a general 
weakness. See also exhaustion; fa¬ 
tigue. 

ASTHENOPIA, weakness of the 
eye muscles and of visual power due 
to overuse or to errors of refraction. 

ASTHMA. A disorder of the upper 
respiratory tract involving the lungs 
and the bronchi, characterized by 
wheezing, coughing, choking and 
shortness of breath. Asthma is a 
svmotom and not a diupasp’ thprpfr.ro 


remedial measures involve locating, 
isolating and eliminating the cause 
rather than treatment of the con¬ 
dition itself. 

About half the incidence of asthma 
is due to allergy-irritation of the 
bronchi by specific allergens breathed 
into the respiratory system. The 
balance of the asthma cases are 
brought on by specific infections in 
the bronchi. The allergens causing 
allergic asthma are the same as those 
which are responsible for hay fever, 
and include pollens, organic dust, 
house dust, feathers, and so forth. 
The reason that these allergens should 
affect the lungs and bronchi rather 
than the nasal passages as in hay 
fever is not known. Allergic asthma 
begins most often between the ages of 
twenty and forty, while asthma 
caused by infection tends to occur in 
older people, although it can occur at 
any age. The disorder is generally 
equally divided between men and 
women. In both types of asthma the 
mucous membrane of the bronchial 
tubes swells and the air passages are 
partially closed. 

A sudden asthma attack is apt to 
be more frightening than it is dan¬ 
gerous. The affected person finds 
himself suddenly unable to fill his 
lungs, and then when he has struggled 
to gasp in a partial breath is unable 
to expel it. The person in an asthma 
attack may bend over slightly to aid 
his breathing efforts. In prolonged or 
especially severe attacks, there may 
be evidence of cyanosis—^the blueness 
of the skin that indicates that the 
blood had been unable to pick up 



Attacks rarely last for more than a 
few hours and are often of much 
shorter duration, although often the 
condition will persist for a much 
longer time in milder form with a 
slight wheezing noise evident in the 
suflEerer’s breathing. 

The tests for the antigen involved 
in allergic asthma are very similar 
to those performed in the search for 
the causative factor in hay fever. The 
timing of attacks is carefully charted 
to ascertain whether they occurred 
after any one action of the sufferer, 
such as visiting in the area of a dust- 
producing factory, or after eating a 
particular food. Often the antigen 
is found simply by this method. If it 
is not, skin tests of possible culprits 
are made and the subsequent treat¬ 
ment wiU involve avoidance of the 
particular substance or substances 
responsible. 

Treatment of the acute serious 
attack is usually by injection of 
epinephrine, or adrenaline. This is 
always prescribed and almost always 
administered by a doctor. For those 
people subject to frequent, compara¬ 
tively mild attacks, the physician will 
often prescribe the inhalation of 
adrenaline by use of a nebulizer or 
atomizer. 

Often, people who suffer from 
allergic asthmatic attacks will out¬ 
grow the tendency—^however, this is 
by no means always the case. The 
asthmatic must learn to avoid the 
cause of his condition and to con¬ 
trol it when it appears. 

See also allergy; bronchitis; 

HAY FEVER. 

ASTIGMATISM, faulty vision which 


results from irregularity in the curva¬ 
ture of one or more refractive sur¬ 
faces of the eye. When the eye is at 
rest, and parallel rays are focused 
exactly on the retina the seeing tissue 
at the back of the eye, vision is said to 
be normal. The human eye is far¬ 
sighted when the rays of light focus 
in back of the retina, or nearsighted 
when the rays of light focus before 
the retina. When parallel rays of light 
coming into the eye are focused at 
different meridians, or angles, the 
eye has astigmatism. Astigmatism is 
usually due to a change in the curva¬ 
ture of the cornea, or outside mem¬ 
brane of the eye, sometimes with 
some shortening or lengthening of 
the diameter of the whole eyeball. 

Occasionally astigmatism is caused 
by defects in the curvature of the lens 
of the eye. The exact origin of these 
anatomic differences is not known 
beyond the fact that the shape of 
the eyeball varies in different people 
so that a tendency for astigmatism 
appears in members of the same 
family. The shape of the eyeball 
itself is inherited. However, injury, 
inflammation, or operative procedure 
on the cornea of the eye have been 
known to change the curves and pro¬ 
duce astigmatism. Apparently, too, 
pressure on the eyelids may distort 
the eyeball and cause astigmatism. 

Probably every eye has some as¬ 
tigmatism. However, many people 
do not have it enough to warrant 
special attention. In other cases, 
astigmatism causes blurred vision 
which necessitates corrective eye¬ 
glasses to properly focus the rays 
of light on the retina. When the de- 



ATABRINE 


ATAXIA 


gree of astigmatism is great, the 
acuteness of vision diminishes for 
both distant and near objects. 

The specialist who examines the 
eyes is likely to suspect astigmatism 


I 



Astigmafisrsi—A chart of the mechanism of 
astigmatism showing the four planes of dis¬ 
tortion because of curving of the eyeball. 


when the eye cannot see the line of 
letters numbered 20 at a twenty-foot 
distance with the aid of spherical 
lenses. A simple test is made with 
the astigmatic dial, a clock with lines 
radiating to each of the hours. If 
the person is unable to see all of the 
rays with equal clarity, astigmatism 
is responsible. The lines that are seen 
more distinctly and the lines seen 
least distinctly indicate the principal 
meridians. By the amount of blurring, 
the eye specialist can determine the 
areas in which curvature of the lens 
needs correction. See also eye. 

ATABRINE, known as quinacrine 
hydrochloride in the U. S. Pharma¬ 
copoeia, was developed during World 
War II as a substitute for quinine, 
used in the treatment of malaria. 


ATAXIA, disorganization of muscu¬ 
lar coordination so that movement 
can be controlled only partially. It 
is a symptom rather than a malady. 

One of the best known ataxias is 
St. Vitus’ dance, in which an ab¬ 
normal nervous system, perhaps as 
a result of streptococcus infection, 
causes constant sharp twitching of 
various parts of the body. Another 
ataxia is multiple sclerosis, in which 
sections of the nervous system de¬ 
generate and form scar tissue, which 
causes partial paralysis, among other 
symptoms. 

Parkinson’s disease, also known as 
shaking palsy and paralysis agitans, 
manifests itself in trembling and loss 
of power in the muscles. Locomotor 
ataxia, characterized especially by 
muscular disorganization and dis¬ 
ordered sensation, is the result of 
infection of the spinal cord by 
syphilis. Several other special ataxias 
are known, including that which 
affects children suffering from cere¬ 
bral palsy. 

Any symptoms, such as loss of 
control over certain muscular move¬ 
ments or unusual involxmtary move¬ 
ments in the muscles, should receive 
the immediate attention of a doctor, 
preferably a neurologist, a specialist 
in nervous disorders. Although the 
condition may be temporary, a 
major disturbance of the nervous 
system is a serious condition. The 
doctor will know which ataxia is in¬ 
volved, and often, if the condition is 
a degenerative one, he can take 
measures to retard or even stop its 
advance. 

Some particular ataxias are he- 





AiMLfcre's FOOT 


ances in the same family. Such 
ataxias, the result of a localized de¬ 
velopmental failure in some part of 
the nervous system, may affect not 
only muscular movement but also 
the sense of sight, touch, hearing, 
taste, and smell. 

In cases of cerebral palsy, lack of 
coordination, most commonly as¬ 
sociated with generalized muscle 
weakness, is notable. Treatment con¬ 
sists of muscle-strengthening and 
coordination exercises. See also 

CEREBRAL PALSY; LOCOMOTOR ATAXIA; 
MULTIPLE sclerosis; PARALYSIS 
AGITANS. 

ATELECTASIS, complete expansion 
or partial collapse of the lung. It may 
be present at birth or result from 
diseases of the lungs or bronchi. It 
is a condition in which the air is lost 
from the small alveoli, or air cham¬ 
bers, in the lungs, giving the lung a 
contracted, solid appearance when 
viewed with the x-ray. 

ATHLETE’S FOOT (tinea pedis), a 
ringworm infection or dermatophy- 
tosis of the feet, is a superficial fungus 
disorder. It is not restricted to ath¬ 
letes, but is found in all age groups 
and in both sexes, although it occurs 
more frequently in men. Usually the 
infection occurs where skin surfaces 
meet, such as between the toes, and, 
more rarely, the fingers, groin, and 
under the arms. Tight, ill-fitting shoes, 
heavy nonporous socks, sweaty feet, 
the use of public showers and locker 
rooms with damp floors all contrib¬ 
ute to the spread of the infection. 
Acute cases usually begin in hot 
weather or in moist tropical climates. 


although chronic and sporadic cases 
may occur at any season of the year. 
When the skin tissues are softened 
by perspiration or moisture, the sur¬ 
face acidity of the skin is decreased 
and more susceptible to infection. 

There are three types of athlete’s 
foot, determined by the kind of 
fungus which attacks the skin, and 
the manner in which the tissues react. 
In the acute, weeping, highly inflamed 
stage, little blisters appear singly or 
in patches between the fourth and big 
toe, with scaling, cracking, and ooz¬ 
ing of the skin, which may spread to 
the undersurface and sole of the 
foot. The more chronic form, in- 
tertriginous, begins with a crack in 
the skin between the fourth and big 
toes, and formation of loosely cling¬ 
ing dead skin beneath which can be 
seen red shiny raw tissue. The dry 
scaly form, hyperkeratotic, is a pro¬ 
nounced thickening of the skin. All 
three types may spread to cover a 
portion or the entire surface of the 
sole. 

Cracked, peeling, or sodden skin, 
or blisters and scaling of the feet may 
not always be due to a fungus in¬ 
fection. These may be contact der¬ 
matitis, a reaction of the skin to 
shoe dye, to certain chemicals in 
rayon or nylon stockings, or merely 
the result of constant friction from 
ill-fitting shoes or stockings. This 
condition requires different treatment 
from athlete’s foot. 

Treatment of athlete’s foot depends 
upon the type of infection present 
Do not use any advertised remedy 
indiscriminately. If the condition is 
the result of allergic sensitivity, these 



ATHLETE'S FOOT 


ATHLETE'S FOOT 


remedies may not only be ineffectual 
but may actually lead to more serious 
secondary infections. The diagnosis 
should be made by a physician, who 
may take a scraping of the infected 
area for microscopic examination 
and cultures of the suspected ma¬ 
terial. Patch tests are also made in 
some cases to determine whether or 
not a sensitivity to dyes or chemicals 
in the footwear causes the condition. 

The fungi responsible for athlete’s 
foot are normally found in the dead, 
superficial layers of the skin, so that 
a continuous possibility of reinfection 
exists. When the skin is moist and 
warm for a long period of time, the 
fungi again become active. Contact of 
the bare feet with organisms picked 
up around swimming pools, shower 
baths, or locker rooms may also 
stimulate growth of fungi. The fungi 
produce allergens which cause an 
eruption on the feet. The eruption it¬ 
self may not be severe, but the al¬ 
lergens enter the blood stream and 
are carried to other parts of the 
body; people sensitive to the fungi 
or their products then develop sec¬ 
ondary eruptions on the hands or 
elsewhere. This type of eruption, 
known as dermatophytid or “id” 
eruption, usually disappears after the 
primary infection is treated. 

A universal method of controlling 
athlete’s foot is not known. How¬ 
ever, the toes must be kept clean and 
dry at all times, and friction in that 
area avoided. Dusting the feet freely 
with foot powder each day and after 
baths helps keep the area dry. San¬ 
dals or perforated shoes and highly 
absorbent cotton socks permit the 


evaporation of sweat, and help absorb 
moisture between the toes. Small 
cotton wads inserted between the 
toes help to absorb perspiration. 
Paper slippers or bath clogs worn in 
public bathing places lessen contact 
of bare feet with the fungi. These 
simple precautions are effective in 
controlling athlete’s foot and in eradi¬ 
cating milder cases. 

In acute cases with reddened, 
blistering, weeping skin, the use of 
wet compresses once or twice a day, 
with mildly astringent agents such as 
saturated boric acid or Burow’s solu¬ 
tion diluted in twenty parts of water, 
is beneficial. When the acute in¬ 
flammation subsides, a calamine 
lotion may be applied. In the acute 
stage, the use of antiseptics or ad¬ 
vertised remedies may be harmful. 
Some leading dermatologists believe 
that once the more acute phase has 
subsided under suitable treatment, 
prolonged therapy with a simple 
mild foot powder is usually enough 
to control the s 5 nmptoms of athlete’s 
foot. They all caution that indiscrimi¬ 
nate self-treatment of the infection 
with prepared ointments may lead to 
more serious inflammation. 

For the chronic stages, the treat¬ 
ment usually suggested is to soak the 
feet in a diluted solution of potassium 
permanganate for half an hour daily, 
and then to remove the crusts, scales, 
and dead skin. A sodium propionate 
ointment may be applied overnight 
and removed the foUovsdng morning, 
and the feet dusted with a 15 per cent 
calcium propionate talcum powder. 
See also contact dermatitis. 



ATOMIC ENERGY IN MEDI¬ 
CINE. Many years of experience 
with radium and x-ray apparatus 
have taught doctors much about 
radiation—the good that it can do 
and also the constant menace of 
harm. Radiation in miniJSe amounts 
occurs almost everywhere. The 
earth is constantly showered with 
radiation from cosmic rays and 
traces of such radiation are found 
in soil and water. The means of de¬ 
tecting radiation include the use of 
photographic film and various in¬ 
struments such as the Geiger count¬ 
er. By the use of these devices 
workers are assured of safety in 
various industries in which radiation 
may be a hazard. 

Radiation may damage the proto¬ 
plasm which constitutes the basic 
materials of the cells of the body. 
It may affect enzymes and changes 
may occur in the genes and chromo¬ 
somes of the cells which determine 
heredity. A heavy dose of radiation 
may destroy a cell but smaller doses 
may so damage the cells that chil¬ 
dren are born with congenital mal¬ 
formations. 

Radiation is measured in roent¬ 
gens, after the man who discovered 
the x-ray. This is an arbitrary term 
of measurement. A human being is 
killed with a dose of roentgens rang¬ 
ing from 200 to 600, or averaging 
about 400, that may reach the body 
at one time. 

Radiation may reach the body 
from x-ray apparatus or from in¬ 
haling or swallowing radioactive 
material. People may be sheltered 
against radiation by shields such as 


lead, or by walls of brick or cement. 
In certain industries special installa¬ 
tions are necessary to protect work¬ 
ers from radioactive dust. The work¬ 
ers wear photographic film badges 
which record how much radiation 
is received. The film becomes dark 
when radiation reaches it. In these 
industries the film badges are ex¬ 
amined and checked each week. 
Physicians also examine the workers 
regularly as a precautionary measure. 

Through research, which has gone 
on since radioactive isotopes were 
first developed, information has ac¬ 
crued as to how such materials may 
be used for benefiting human health. 
In the human body radioisotopes, 
which are elements made radioac¬ 
tive, have been used to trace the 
amounts of various substances in 
different parts of the body. For in¬ 
stance, radiosodium can be injected 
into the blood and the speed of the 
circulation determined at various 
points of the body. This technique 
may help in determining whether 
blood vessels are still open or wheth¬ 
er they arc obstructed by clots or 
hardening of the arteries. Many sub¬ 
stances such as digitalis, colchicine, 
iodine, and nicotine in the form of 
tobacco have been made radioactive 
and then traced in various organs of 
the body. In this way medical scien¬ 
tists have learned how various radio¬ 
isotopes act in the human body. 

Radioactive iodine has been espe¬ 
cially important to medicine. When 
iodine is taken into the body it 
goes for the most part to the thyroid 
gland. By measuring the amount 
and the rate of uptake of iodine in 



ATOMSC ENERGY IN MEDICINE 


ATOMIC ENERGY IN MEDICINE 


the thyroid gland, the doctor can 
determine how well this gland is 
doing its work. Thus the conven¬ 
tional basal metabolism test is in 
many places being replaced by the 
radioactive iodine test. Moreover, 
the iodine can take the radioactivity 
with it to the thyroid gland and in 
this way it has been used to treat 
cancer of the thyroid. 

Other radioisotopes have also 
been used in treating disease. Radio- 



Momk Energy in Medicine A thyroid 
cancer patient is being helped by a nurse 
after faking an "atomic cocktail/' a tasteless 
solution of radioactive iodine. Iodine is 
taken up by the thyroid tissue, both normal 
and cancerous. The cancerous tissue is sen¬ 
sitive to the radioactive bombardment and 
is destroyed by it. The norma! tissue is not 
affected. 

Afoitiic Energy in Medicine—The Geiger 
counter is the heart of this instrument being 
used on this cancer patient. The counter 
follows the course of radioactive iodine as 
it moves toward the thyroid gland. The 
amount of iodine being taken up by the 
aland is belna 


phosphorus has been used to lessen 
the number of red blood cells in 
the condition called polycythemia 
and it also has shown beneficial re¬ 
sults in chronic cases of leukemia. 
Radioactiv% materials have been 
used to help in locating tumors of 
the brain and also in treating other 
forms of cancer. Radiogold has been 
one of the isotopes used in certain 
cancer cases. 

Radiation, besides being used to 
combat cancer, can also be a cause 
of cancer, as revealed in follow-up 
studies of Japanese who received 
excessive doses of atomic radiation 
when the bombing of Hiroshima 
took place. When radium is taken 
internally it tends to localize in 
bones and to cause cancer of the 
bones. This was revealed a number 
of years ago in the cases of some 
women who moistened with their 
lips brushes with a radium mixture 
to make watch dials visible at night. 





Atomic Energy in Medicine—The radio¬ 
active iodine is traced in the patient by a 
radiation counting instrument. By determin¬ 
ing the location of the radiation and meas¬ 
uring the strength the effectiveness of 
treatment can be verified. 


tion may be detected by examination 
of the eyes. 

A report by the United Nations 
Scientific Commission on the effect 
of atomic radiation has brought out 
pertinent facts regarding its dangers 
to human health. A certain small 
proportion of cases of leukemia and 
bone cancer may result from natural 
radiation. People who are over¬ 
exposed as radiologists and radium 
workers have a greater hazard. The 
Commission called attention also to 
the hazards of blood disorders, cata¬ 
racts of the eye, and congenital 
malformations. Because of the pro¬ 
tections constantly available in in¬ 
dustries involving atomic energy, 
workers in these industries are found 
to suffer very little damage from 
atomic energy except when there 
is carelessness. 

Investigations have shown that 
one-fourth to one-half of the radia¬ 
tion received in more highly devel¬ 
oped countries is from medical use 
of x-rays, and less than one per cent 
is due to radioactive fallout. The 
benefits of x-ray far outweigh any 
dangers that may occur, and suitable 
controls have been developed to 
shield both x-ray operators, techni¬ 
cians and others that receive x-ray. 
Unnecessary use of the x-ray, such 
as was carried on in shoe stores con¬ 
ducting x-rays of the feet, is now 
abolished by laws in most states 
of the United States. 

A great deal of concern has been 
expressed regarding the dangers of 
radioactive energy in foods. A 
British report has shown that an 
average diet in England contains 


Cobalt is an element which when 
placed in an atomic reactor becomes 
cobalt-60. This is a radioactive iso¬ 
tope which is much less expensive 
than radium but which can be used 
effectively for the treatment of can¬ 
cer. Radioactive cobalt is also used 
to substitute for the ordinary x-ray. 
Another isotope used in cancer treat¬ 
ment is cesium-137. Because certain 
kinds of cancer cells are more sensi¬ 
tive to radiation than others, physi¬ 
cians are beginning to classify the 
forms of cancer which are especially 
susceptible to treatment with radio¬ 
active isotopes. 

As knowledge of atomic energy 
has increased, new facts as well as 
possibilities in the field of medicine 
are coming to notice. In Japan peo¬ 
ple have been found who were ex¬ 
posed to atomic energy and devel¬ 
oped small opacities in the lenses 
of the eyes two to ten years after 
exposure to the nuclear radiation. 
The eye is obviously especially sensi¬ 
tive to such exposure. Perhaps the 
earliest signs of damage from radia- 

sn 




ATOMIC ENERGY IN MEDICINE ATOMIC ENERGY IN MEDICINE 


300 times as much radioactive ma¬ 
terial as might reach people through 
radioactive tallout. However, the 
radioactivity from diet and fallout 
together does not constitute a large 
dose. Similarly, much concern has 
been given to the possibility of radio- 
strontium occurring in milk due to 
radiation received by cows. Radio¬ 
strontium is chemically like calcium, 
which IS found in large quantities in 
milk. Calcium is itself a protective 
agent against the effects of the stron¬ 
tium since the tissues of plants and 
animals prefer calcium to strontium. 
The highest levels of bone radio- 
strontium have been found in peo¬ 
ple living in areas where rice is the 
main food. People who get their 
calcium from milk and milk prod¬ 
ucts accumulate lower levels of 
strontium in their bones. 

Our civilian defense organization, 
in anticipation that some day the 



United States may be exposed to 
the hazards of the atomic bomb, has 
developed much information and 
guidance as to what is to be done 
if such an eventuality occurs. A 
letter to the local or state civilian 
defense agency will bring pamphlets 
with full information on how to 
build a bomb shelter or how to 
utilize available facilities, including 
the foods, drugs and other materials 
that should be kept on hand in a 
bomb shelter. See also radiation; 
radium; x-rays. 



Radiocicfive Cobalt—After cobalt has been 
irradiated in an atomic reactor it becomes 
strongly radioactive itself. Because radio¬ 
active cobalt is much cheaper it has almost 
completely replaced radium in the treatment 
of cancer. A Cobalt-60 needle is pictured 
here. It is used to place the radiation next 
to cancerous tissue. Note that the needle is 
handled by a long forceps in order to give 
the physician the additional protection of 
distance from the needle. 

Cobaif Tberopy—Radioactive cobalt emits 
very strong rays similar to X-rays. Cobalt 
therapy units have been constructed to take 
advantage of this radiation. After the unit 
has been adjusted, part of its heavy shield¬ 
ing is removed, allowing a beam of rays to 



ATROPHY, the normal or abnormal 
shr inkin g of an organ or cell which 
has previously reached mature size. 
Degeneration of tissue sometimes 
accompanies pathological atrophy. 

ATROPINE. See deadly nightshade 

POISONING. 

AUDITORY NERVE, one of the 
sensory nerves which influence hear¬ 
ing and control equilibrium. 

AUREOMYCIN, a yellow crystalline 
substance, the trade name for chlor- 
tetracycline, one of the newer anti¬ 
biotics. See also antibiotics. 

AURICLE, either of the two upper 
chambers of the heart which receive 
blood from the veins. The left auricle 
admits the blood from the lungs and 
the right auricle from general circu¬ 
lation. An auricle is also any append¬ 
age shaped like an ear, and refers, 
too, to the projecting part of the 
external ear. See also blood; circu¬ 
latory system; heart. 


AUSCULTATION, the detection and 
study of sounds produced by the 
lungs, heart, and other organs to 
help determine their physical condi¬ 
tion. The listening device is the 
stethoscope. 



Auscultation — The doctor uses a sfetho- 

scope to hear sounds of the opening and 
closing of the heart valves and the breath 
sounds in the lungs. 



BABIES, PREMATURE, babies 
which are born before the full term 
of pregnancy or which weigh less 
than five and a half pounds. Babies 
rarely survive if they weigh less 
than 2.2 pounds, or 1000 grams, at 
birth although there are records of 
the survival of large numbers of in- 


i; 






fants who were born weighing les 
than 2.2 pounds. Since these rec 
ords show that such babies catch uf 
with normal infants by the time the} 
are six months to a year old, ever} 
possible effort is made to save then 
lives. Use of the incubator, breath 
ing oxygen mixed with carbon diox¬ 
ide, feeding of mothers’ milk, and 
application of other developments of 
modern medical science have helped 
premature babies survive to become 
healthy children and adults. 

The first step to assure survival of 
a premature child is to regulate the 
body heat. Old-fashioned incubators 
have been replaced by modern, elec- 

Premcifwre Babies—Models showing vari¬ 
ations in the size of newborn Infants. Most 
babies weigh between six and nine pounds 
at birth. The baby who is born within 28 
weeks after conception and weighs about 
two pounds requires immediate care to 
reduce the dangers associated with prema¬ 
ture birth. Good care during the firs! few 
months helps the premature infant fo grow 
and in time his development will equal 





Preiwcifiire Bcibies—Phofograph of premature babies who weighed from one and a quarter 
fo two and a half pounds at birth Note the underdeveloped arms, legs, and hands in some 
of the babies. Skin is usually wrinkled and furrowed in infants who are premature 


trically heated beds in which the 
temperature is regulated by a ther¬ 
mostat. Portable incubators have 
been developed for births taking 
place at home so that the baby can 
be put almost immediately after 
birth into such a device and then be 
taken to a hospital. 

Authorities are agreed that 
mother’s milk is the best possible 
food for premature babies. In most 
cities arrangements are now made 
to obtain this type for all premature 
infants. 

The question is constantly raised 
as to whether babies born pre¬ 
maturely have the same mental 
capabilities as those born at the 
usual time. No conclusive studies 
have been made on this problem, 
but some physicians are of the opin¬ 
ion that premature infants born 
after eight months progress more 
slowly than full-term infants during 


the first year. They ai'c somewhat 
slower in learning to co-ordinate 
during this time. It is interesting, in 
this connection, to realize that some 
of the greatest men of history were 
born prematurely, including Charles 
Darwin, the French philosopher 
Renan, the great military leader 
Napoleon, Isaac Newton and Vol¬ 
taire, 

BACILLARY DYSENTERY, an 
acute infection of the large bowel, 
caused by bacilli, rod-shaped bacteria, 
called Shigella, after the Japanese 
doctor who first identified them. They 
enter the body in contaminated food 
or water. The symptoms of the in¬ 
fection include diarrhea and cramps, 
and it normally runs its course in 
about ten days and is rarely fatal. 

Epidemic bacillary dysentery pre¬ 
vails most frequently when large 
groups of people are crowded to- 




BACILLI 


BACKACHi 


gether without adequate sanitation— 
for example, in armies or refugee 
camps. World War 11 was the first 
war in which sanitation was suffi¬ 
ciently developed to prevent such 
epidemics in the field. 

Sulfonamide drags are usually ef¬ 
fective against the invading bacteria, 
but if the bacilli develop resistance to 
sulfa, other antibiotics or drugs may 
be used. Prevention involves not only 
identification and isolation of all 
cases but also of carriers, persons in 
whose bodies the organisms live with¬ 
out producing in them the usual 
symptoms of the disease. These per¬ 
sons, particularly if they have an oc¬ 
cupation such as cook or waiter, may 
spread the bacilli. 

The symptoms of bacillary dysen¬ 
tery are not unlike those of amebic 
dysentery, cholera, typhoid and 
parat 5 ^hoid fevers and the diarrhea 
due to infection by Salmonella, 
another rod-shaped organism which 
may get into food. Special tests and 
examinations are therefore essential 
to determine the particular bacteria 
present in each case. See also amebic 
dysentery; diarrhea. 

BACILLI, one of the main divisions 
of bacteria, have a characteristic rod 
shape. They include a large propor¬ 
tion of the most significant bacteria. 
Bacilli of one type or another are 
responsible for tuberculosis, diph¬ 
theria, typhoid fever, leprosy, plague, 
tetanus or lockjaw, and other diseases. 
Bacilli are also involved in the de¬ 
composition of dead organic sub¬ 
stances, in acid fermentation, and in 
various processes of wine maVi-nw 


BACKACHE, like headache, 
symptom rather than a disorder and 
similarly, may originate from 
multiplicity of causes. (Lumbago am 
low-back pain are words meaning m 
more than that the back aches. 
Because of the complex structure o 
the human backbone, it can be sub 
ject to a great variety of disorders 
Its vertical position, which enable; 
man to walk vertically and perfonr 
tasks impossible for animals, throw; 
a burden on the spine which most 
creatures are spared. 

Back pain and back ailments may 
be closely related to occupations in 
which the spinal structure is required 
to absorb more stress than it can 
tolerate. Continued heavy lifting or 
prolonged standing on the feet im¬ 
pose unusual strains and have a per¬ 
ceptible effect on the body, even 
during a single day, and may be re¬ 
sponsible for back pain. For example, 
a traffic officer who stands on hard 
pavement all day without rest will 
often lose a full inch in height be¬ 
tween the beginning of his work and 
bedtime. Eight hours’ rest permits 
the spine to spring back to its full 
normal length and the inch is re¬ 
stored. 

Backache may result from infec¬ 
tion, overstrain, disruption of some 
part, injury or failure to function 
properly in any part of the compli¬ 
cated spinal system. The structure 
of tissues of the back may have been 
defective from birth. Perhaps one or 
more of the many parts of the back 
have been injured or strained. Oc¬ 
casionally a slight difference between 

•fllijOk 1 4.1-. —. ■* 



BACKACHE 


whole body off balance and require 
abnormal effort on the part of the 
back to maintain correct position. 
Infection may attack any part of the 
back and is particularly troublesome 
when it affects the joints or the largest 
muscles involved. Tumorous growths 
may appear. Disturbances in the 



glandular systems and in the organs 
may indirectly be the source of 
serious back disorders. Malfunction¬ 
ing of the parathyroid glands, for 
instance, may cause a general soften¬ 
ing of the bones and thus be responsi¬ 
ble for a fracture of the backbone. 
Diseases of the nervous system, men¬ 
ingitis, sciatica, encephalitis, and 
others also produce backache. 

Backache may originate with con¬ 
ditions which primarily affect some 
other part of the body, or as a by¬ 
product of surgery. Conditions as 
varied as stomach ulcers, gout, and 
disease of the gallbladder can cause 
back discomfort. In women, stress 
and strain on the tissues joining the 
womb to surrounding tissues, either 
as a consequence of pregnancy or 
otherwise, often produce backache. 
Occasionally abdominal surgery heals 
in such a way that scar tissue develops 
in a place that becomes troublesome 
to the back. Finally, some cases seem 
primarily to have a psychological 
basis. 

In treating backache, the doctor 
first endeavors to establish the specific 

Bcickaclie — The spine. The bones of the 
spine {vertebral column) are classified in 
groups according to iocafion. These verte¬ 
brae are movable, but as we get to the 
lower end of the spine a number of small 
bones (five) fuse to make up one bone 
called the sacrOm, or the sacral area, and 
the remaining bones {four) fuse to form the 
coccyx. An intervertebral disc {not shown) 
lies between two movable vertebrae and 
acts as a cushion or shock absorber; it may 
be damaged or displaced under excessive 
strain or exaggerated motion. The spine 
shown h^re is viewed from the left side of 
the body, end the spiny proiections seen on 
the right in the drawing are the tips of 
bones which can be felt If the finger 1$ run 
either up or down the column. 



BACKBONE 


BACTERI 


condition involved and its sources. 
Sometimes this is simple to do, but 
frequently it includes extensive tests, 
x-ray studies, and collection of the 
fullest possible medical history of 
the patient as well as complete in¬ 
formation of the conditions of his 
work and daily activities. 

Excess weight, flat feet, and other 
structural conditions can and should 
be controlled. Frequently braces 
which support and rest a long irri¬ 
tated tissue win bring relief from 
backache. Warmth and gradually in¬ 
creasing degrees of massage and exer¬ 
cise are also often helpful. For acute 
or chronic backache due to strain 
in the lumbo-sacral region (low-back 
pain), rest on a flat, rather hard sur¬ 
face is beneficial. Boards can be in¬ 
serted between the mattress and 
springs to insure a nonsagging sleep¬ 
ing surface. As long as it does not 
have too much “give,” the bed need 
not be too hard. Those who suffer 
from postural backache will obtain 
definite relief from sleeping on a 
flat surface and by improving their 
posture. 

Some of the many products sold 
to alleviate the pain of backache do 
afford a temporary relief. Persistent 
back pains, however, are a sign of 
a deeper disorder and the doctor 
should be consulted. See also 
SLIPPED disc; spinal cord. 

BACKBONE, another term for spine. 
See SPINE. 

BACTEREMIA, blood poisoning, 
the presence of bacteria in the blood. 
When the body’s natural defenses 
around the site of an infection have 


been temporarily disorganized, ba 
teria may enter the blood strear 
Such an invasion is called bacteremi 
Symptoms are chills, heavy sweatin 
or general collapse. 

Bacteremia is especially sevei 
when caused by the entrance ( 
staphylococci into the blood streai 
from abscesses in the skin or bon 
The migrating bacteria may set u 
new abscesses at distant points in th 
body, in the deeper tissues or in th 
lungs. A physician should be calle 
promptly because time is of the es 
sence in controlling such a situatios 
Infections of this type can usuall; 
be controlled with antibiotics. Befor 
the introduction of the newer drugs 
especially penicillin, fatalities wen 
numerous. The best means for pre 
venting bacterial invasion is to car( 
for aU wounds adequately and im 
mediately, and to get medical atten 
tion without delay for infections o; 
the skin, tonsils, mouth, and ears 
See also pyemia. 

BACTERIA, one-ceUed organisms 
scientifically classified as members ol 
the plant world. They reproduce b) 
fission; that is, each splits, producing 
two completely new organisms. Bac¬ 
teria constitute one of the basic and 
largest classes of microorganisms, 
The term bacteria is preferable tc 
the more popular name, germ, which 
indefinitely indicates almost any in¬ 
visible, disease-causing organism. Al¬ 
though innumerable kinds of bac¬ 
teria are known, only a few can live 
within the human body, and many 
of these are not harmful. However, 
other bacteria, known as pathogens, 
can oroduce such dispa«f«j a® 



culosis, diphtheria, tetanus, typhoid 
fever, and pneumonia. 

The French scientist, Louis Pas¬ 
teur, was one of the first to investigate 
the relationship of bacteria and other 
microorganisms to human and animal 
disease. Subsequently another scien¬ 
tist, Robert Koch, developed specific 
standards for proving that specific 
germs cause certain diseases. Koch’s 
rules are: (1) the germ must be 
located within the body of the person 
or animal suffering from the disease. 
To verify the presence of the germ, 
swabs are taken of the infected area, 
such as the throat or ear. (2) The 
organisms, if grown in another body, 
must be able to produce a similar 
illness, or, if grown in a laboratory 
culture medium, more of the same 
organism capable of causing the same 
disease. 

Bacteria are extremely sensitive 
to the conditions under which they 
live, which renders them relatively 
susceptible to complete control. For 
instance, they do not survive a high 
degree of heat or a lower heat sus¬ 
tained over a longer period, especially 
when moisture is associated with it. 
Consequently surgical instruments 
can be cleansed thoroughly of bac¬ 
teria by fifteen or twenty minutes of 
boiling. Complete dryness, however, 
renders it impossible for bacteria to 
live, which is the reason that wound 
dressings are kept as dry as possible. 
Sunlight retards some bacteria and 
destroys others. Again, some germs, 
called aerobic, must have air to live; 
without it they die. Others, known as 
anaerobic, can live only in the ab¬ 
sence of air. 


Disease-causing, or pathogenic, 
bacteria harm the human body by 
the poisons or toxins which they 
produce. Some of these are excreted 
while others are held within the 
bacterial ceU until it is destroyed. 
One of the protective measures of 
the body against infectious disease 
is the production of antitoxins which 
counteract these bacterijil products. 
In addition the body produces other 
substances which prepare the bacteria 
for easier attack by the protective 
white cells of the blood, which also 
leads to the disintegration of the 
bacteria. 

Bacteria usually abound wherever 
any moisture is present within the 
human environment, and protection 
against dangerous bacteria is a matter 
of selective measures rather than an 
attempt to avoid them entirely, which 
would be impossible. Eating and 
cooking equipment must be kept 
thoroughly clean for the elimination 
of bacteria. The hands should be 
washed before eating, especially after 
prolonged soiling or contact with 
anything in which dangerous bacteria 
are likely to live, such as human or 
animal wastes. Likewise bathing 
should be frequent. 

The significance of these measures 
was established by a study at a mid- 
western university. The results proved 
that the effective laundering and dry¬ 
ing of ordinary underwear cuts the 
bacterial count to one thousand or 
less per square inch, and the number 
rises to 400,000 per square inch in 
a single day’s wear; that is, the num¬ 
bers of bacteria present multiply 400 
times, and reach 10,000,000 per 



BACTERIAL ENDOCARDITIS 


Bacterici — in the laboratory, bacteria are 
cultivated upon nutrient substances. A doctor 
is shown examining test tubes in which bac¬ 
teria are growing There are many types of 
bacteria, most of which are not harmful, in 
fact, many are very essentia! to our living. 
Some bacteria which attack the body pro¬ 
duce disease. Scarlet lever, pneumonia, 
typhoid fever, tuberculosis and diphtheria 
are some diseases caused by harmful organ¬ 
isms. 

Bacterid— Microscopic pictures of bacteria 
which cause specific diseases. The size and 
shape of the bacterium are characteristics 
the bacteriologist looks for when helping 
the doctor diagnose a disease. 




-?,9.CUi.Q 



v,,0. 







alcohol are available to clean wounds 
and instruments, and immunizatior 
procedures ward off many of th< 
worst infectious diseases, such as 
diphtheria, lockjaw or tetanus. Ir 
addition the antibiotic drugs, lik« 
penicillin and the sulfas, are effectivj 
against a wide range of bacterial in¬ 
fections. The best protection is pre¬ 
vention, which means maintenance of 
clean conditions in and about the 
body. See also bacilli; infections; 
INFECTIOUS diseases; immuniza¬ 
tion. 


square inch after underclothing is 
worn a week without washing. 

Since Pasteur’s basic discovery in 
the nineteenth century, medicine has 
developed a formidable array of 
specific weapons against bacteria, in 
addition to cleanliness, clean water 
supplies, and adequate sewage sys¬ 
tems. Antiseptics like iodine and 


BACTERIAL ENDOCARDITIS, an 
infection of the membranes of the 
heart cavities, which often attacks 
people who have had a previous heart 
disease. This condition also accounts 
for about 2 per cent of all organic 
heart disease, usually affecting young 
adults, although persons of every age 
group may have it. 


Two forms of bacterial endocardi¬ 
tis are the acute and subacute. The 
acute form strikes suddenly and may 
cause death within a few days unless 
treated immediately. The subacute 
type comes on slowly and may also 
cause death within a year or so unless 
medical treatment is begun promptly. 
About 30 per cent of the cases end 
fatally, from various causes such as 
cerebral embolism and cardiac fail¬ 
ure, in spite of treatment with the 
new antibiotics. 

A characteristic sign is fever, 
especially with the acute form, al¬ 
though intermittent fever is usual in 
the chronic type. Anemia is also a 
symptom; as is embolism, which may 
disrupt circulation in acute cases, and 
in some instances cause nodes to ap¬ 
pear in the skin of the fingers and 
toes. Fingers may also take on a 
clubbed appearance. Other complica¬ 
tions include involvement of the lungs 
and kidney. Effective treatment of al¬ 
most all cases of bacterial endocardi¬ 
tis consists of the use of one or more 
of the various antibiotics, such as 
penicillin or erythromycin, over vary¬ 
ing periods of time. 

For people who have heart defects 
and who may be susceptible to bac¬ 
terial endocarditis, special care should 
be taken in dental or surgical treat¬ 
ment to prevent the possibility of its 
development. Such persons should be 
given large doses of penicillui or other 
antibiotics before any operation. See 
also ANEURYSM 

BACTERICIDE, any substance able 
to destroy bacteria, 

BACTERIOraAGE, the name ap- 
on 


plied to a virus when it infects bac¬ 
teria. See also viruses. 

BACTERIOSTATIC denotes the 
power of stopping the growth of bac¬ 
teria. 

BALANITIS, inflammation of the 
foreskin and the tip of the penis. 

BALANTIDIASIS, or Balantidial 
colitis, an infection by a species of 
protozoa, unicellular bacillus, called 
balantidium. It is characterized by 
diarrhea and dysentery. 

BALDNESS, or alopecia, loss or 
absence of hair. According to one 
authoritative estimate, nearly 300 
million dollars a year is spent on al¬ 
leged remedies and treatments for 
baldness. Occasionally good results 
seem to occur from these remedies, 
usually because hair, in many types 
of baldness, returns regardless of 
treatment or lack of it. This type of 
baldness and spontaneous regrowth 
often follows infectious diseases 
accompanied by fever, including 
pneumonia, typhoid, and influenza. 
Serious hair loss sometimes follows 
childbirth and surgery. In all these 
conditions, normal hair growth re¬ 
turns without help. 

Bald or balding persons often won¬ 
der if there is anything that can be 
done to remedy their condition. The 
medical, and only reliable, answer 
at this time is that not much can be 
done. However, some hope for the 
future is held out; solution awaits 
the time and money needed for more 
thorough investigation. 

Hair remedies and treatments for 
baldness are as old as civili z ation. 



BALDNESS 


BALDNES 


The first known written medical 
record, the Ebers papyrus, contains a 
remedy for loss of hair. This pre¬ 
scription has among its ingredients 
fats of the lion, hippopotamus, croco¬ 
dile, goose, serpent, and ibex. 

Aristotle stated more than two 
thousand years ago that men and 
not women are usually afifiicted by 
baldness, and today’s medical science 
confirms this observation. Baldness 
seems not only to be largely restricted 
to males but appears also to be 
actually a male disease. According to 
Drs. Peter Flesch and Fred Urbach 
of the University of Pennsylvania, 
“Male sex hormones circulating in 
the body stimulate the sweat glands 
to produce a surplus of sebum which 


increases baldness.” Attempts 1 
counteract the effects of the male se 
gland have not been successful, an 
neither have experiments with tl: 
female hormone, estrogen, in ha 
creams and lotions. Dermatologis 
agree that the use of estrogen in bak 
ness may be dangerous and is thus il 
advised. 

The only explanation scientists giv 
for the fact that many men do m. 
suffer from baldness while so man 
others do is that baldness is largel 
hereditary. Most popular beliej 
about baldness are untrue and e? 
plotted by quacks. Dry brittle haii 
dandruff scales, thinning of hair i 
the crown and temples, tight an 
itching scalp actually do not cans 




iaidiiess—Alopecia areata—a condition of baldness which occurs in patches. Bald spots ma) 
appear on any area of the body, but most often the head is involved, loss of hair is sudden 
regrowth may be slow or spontaneous and can take place without treatment. In some case’ 
bald spots are resistant despite all efforts to stimulate hair growth. Alopecia areata affecti 
both sexes and the cause is unknown. Two types of area baldness are shown. The band-like 

tVDe is the form frenu<anitlv 



baldness. Nor is it encouraged by 
wearing hats, tight or otherwise. 

Excessive falling of hair is rarely 
a symptom of true baldness, as has 
been pointed out, but more often a 
sign of a physical disorder which a 
physician should attend to. Some ill¬ 
ness usually precedes the condition 
known as “patch” or “area” baldness. 
It may be due to any of a variety of 
maladies, and may clear up when the 
patient has recovered from the ill¬ 
ness that caused it. 

If dandruff were a cause of bald¬ 
ness, most people would be victims 
of it. Dandruff, the flaking of the 
scalp, is apparently a normal process 
and, in the opinion of most doctors, 
is not harmM to hair. Yet while 
the chances are great that most cases 
of dandruff are the simple kind, a 
rarer type, seborrheic dermatitis, 
carmot be disregarded. It is caused by 
an infection of the glands in the 
scalp, and produces thick scales 
which provoke soreness and itchi¬ 
ness and may result in serious loss 
of hair. For control of dandruff, 
preparations of selenium, such as 
Selsun, are now available in oint¬ 
ments, lotion, and other forms. See 
also alopecia; hair. 

BALLISTOCARDIOGRAPHY, a 

technique for recording the vibra¬ 
tion of the body that occurs when 
the heart contracts and throws blood 
into the aorta (the large blood ves¬ 
sel that carries the blood from the 
heart) or the recoil from this con¬ 
traction. This vibration is shown as 
waves on a tape, and the waves 
vary according to the efficiency of 


the operation of the heart The 
method is especially valuable in 
studying the changes that take place 
when the large blood vessel called 
the aorta is nan owed or when there 



Bdllisfocarciio^rctpliy— Taking a ballisfo- 
cardiogrom with the Arbeit Balhsfocardio- 
graph This opparatys records the body^s 
recoil caused by the cardiac confroction and 
the ejection of blood Info the oorfo. 

IS severe coronary hc<irt disease. The 
ballistocardiogram has been found 
so seniitivc that the effects on the 
heart of smoking a cigarette near 
the machine are clearly apparent. 

BANDAGE, a strip of material, 
usually of gauze, muslin, or flannel, 
in rolls of varied width, used to secure 
dressings, to immobilize a part, to 
check hemorrhage Mid to support an 
injured member or to apply pressure. 




BAUBER'S ITCH 


BARBITURATE 


BARBER’S ITCH, scientificaUy 
sycosis, an infection of the bearded 
areas of the face and neck, may be 
caused by a fungus, tinea barbae, by 
a germ, such as staphylococcus, 
sycosis barbae or sycosis vulgaris. 

Tinea barbae, which affects the 
chin and jowls and rarely the upper 
lip, is a severe inflammation, resulting 
in boggy little lumps and deep-seated 
sores that contain pus. At one time 
the infection was often spread by the 
use of contaminated shaving articles 
and towels m barber shops, but state 
laws which govern sanitation in bar¬ 
ber shops have to a great extent con¬ 
trolled this problem. All shaving 
equipment must be steriUzed after 
use, while barber’s itch is being 
treated. Antiseptic lotions, fungicides, 
and ointments are helpful in reducing 
the inflammation. The disease is 
curable. If neglected, it may leave 
disfiguring scars; but if it is treated 
promptly, and the doctor’s instruc¬ 
tions followed carefuUy, it improves 
rapidly. 

Sycosis barbae, sometimes caused 
by an infective discharge from the 
nose, begins with red sores around 
the hair follicles. The sores tend to 
become grouped and form pus. The 
condition most frequently attacks the 
upper lip, though it may involve the 
entire bearded area. The skin usually 
bums and is painful. 

Early treatment prevents destruc¬ 
tion of the roots of the hair and the 
resulting scarred and distorted skin. 
If the skin is inflamed, hot, satu¬ 
rated, boric acid dressings may be 
applied daily. The infected hairs are 
sometimes removed with a forceps 


until the skin seems to be heale 
Soothing lotions or ointments ai 
used at night, care being taken not t 
apply anything that would irritate tl 
skin. X-ray therapy has been foun 
beneficial in some cases. Shaving ma 
be continued throughout the duratio 
of the infection, but the razor shoul 
be dipped in alcohol before it is use( 
and a shaving cream used that doe 
not require a brush. 

BARBITURATES, derivatives c 
barbituric acid used in medicine £ 
hypnotic and sedative drugs. Sed£ 
tives, or hypnotic drugs, are a valu£ 
ble requisite to medicine. They ca 
help break the cycle of insomnia i 
some cases, and restore the slee 
pattern in others. Often they help t 
induce sleep when nervous and phys 
ical exhaustion has set up such 
pattern of irritability that the perso 
needs to relax for a long time. Th 
inability to sleep can surely increas 
tension, making sleep exceedingl 
difiScuIt. Sedation may be essentia 
as the initial step to restful slumbei 

Barbitmrates are usually taken b 
mouth. Around barbituric acid, vari 
ous pharmaceutical concerns hav 
arranged diverse chemical groupings 
Their main difference lies in absorp 
tion and elimination, onset and dura 
tion of action. In the United States 
the most commonly known barbitu 
rates are pentobarbital, (Nembutal) 
secobarbital (Seconal), amobarbita 
(Amytal), and phenobarbital (Lumi 
nal) which is the most slowly ab 
sorbed and longest acting. 

Small doses of these barbiturate! 
evoke drowsiness bv denressimr th< 



functions of those parts of the brain 
related to mental activities. There¬ 
fore, physicians often prescribe these 
drugs to help patients with ulcers to 
relax and thus overcome contributing 
causes such as worry and anxiety. 

Only in large doses do barbiturates 
have any value as analgesics. Some 
quick-acting barbiturates, such as 
pentothal sodium and evipan sodium, 
have been found effective as anesthet¬ 
ics during short operations because 
they rarely have any aftereffect. 

In spite of newer drugs, long-acting 
barbiturates like phenobarbital re¬ 
main a medical adjunct in epilepsy, 
in which the cerebral motor cortex 
is abnormally active. Barbiturates are 
effective because they not only pro¬ 
duce a hypnotic effect but also slow 
down the activity of that segment 
of the brain which induces move¬ 
ment. Phenobarbital drugs also elicit 
calmness in patients in whom condi¬ 
tions of abnormal motor activity are 
produced by overactive thyroid 
glands. 

Unfortunately barbiturates are too 
often subject to abuse. The physician 
with a patient who is psychologically 
disturbed endeavors to direct his 
treatment toward the eradication of 
the fundamental cause of the disturb¬ 
ance in preference to treating the 
symptoms by a long-term prescrip¬ 
tion of barbiturates. Barbiturates 
should serve only as a temporary 
bridge. 

Taken frequently over a long time, 
and in large doses, barbiturates are 
harmful. As in the case of alchohol- 
ism, it is not easy to say when proper 
use of such drugs ends and improper 


use begins. Dr, Harris Isbell of the 
U. S. Public Health Service says that 
many people use 0.2 grams without 
any apparent iU effects. This equals 
two 1^-grain capsules, or one 
3-grain “block-buster.” Much more 
than this amount will cause various 
degrees of mental and physical im¬ 
pairment. Four times this quantity 
taken for only a few months will pro¬ 
duce a dependency that may give the 
user withdrawal symptoms similar to 
those an addict goes through when 
the drug is removed, according to 
Dr. Isbell. 

F. Leslie Hart, chief of the Boston 
District U. S. Food and Drug Ad¬ 
ministration, says of the habitual use 
of barbiturates, “From a purely phys¬ 
ical viewpoint we feel that barbitu¬ 
rates are worse than narcotics. The 
habitual victim has difficulty thinking, 
cannot perform even simple calcula¬ 
tions, loses the power to judge dis¬ 
tances, becomes infantile, weeps 
easily and eventually has a desire for 
death.” 

According to both state and federal 
laws, barbiturates are not to be sold 
without a doctor’s prescription and 
there cannot be any legal refilling of 
a prescription without specific orders 
from a doctor. Unfortunately the 
ways in which these laws are violated 
are numerous, and the frequent and 
tragic misuse of drugs which the 
medical profession considers useful 
must be curbed. 

Barbiturate poisoning may be mild, 
moderate, or severe. About 1,500 
deaths are caused yearly In the 
United States by the acute form, 
which is the most common. Women 



BARIUM SULPHATE 


BASAL METABOLISM 


are more subject to excessive doses 
of barbiturates than men. Some time 
ago, the U. S, Public Health Service 
investigated 547 nonfatal cases; 407 
women took an overdose of the drug 
to 140 men. Of these cases, 254 were 
accidental and 293 were attempts at 
suicide. In addition, poisoning may 
result from a pronounced sensitivity 
to the drugs. Drowsiness induced by 
a small dose may pass into a coma 
after an overdose. 

The symptoms of acute barbiturate 
poisoning resemble, to some degree, 
those of alcoholic intoxication. 
Among the numerous mental symp¬ 
toms are moral deterioration, aggres¬ 
sive outbursts, slurring of speech, and 
impairment of mental activity. A reel¬ 
ing gait, because of uncontrolled 
muscular action, rapid beating of the 
heart, disturbed digestion and vision, 
and, in severe cases, exceedingly slow 
and shallow respiration are other 
signs. 

Mortality, which is at present 
about 8 per cent in aU cases of 
barbiturate abuse, is highest in older 
people and in those with a weakened 
physical condition. Care should be 
exercised not to give barbiturates to 
people with liver and kidney dis¬ 
orders, since the liver is actively in¬ 
volved in destrojdng toxins and the 
kidney in excreting them. 

New sleeping pills, nonbarbitu¬ 
rates, have recently been developed. 
Chemists are on the threshold of de¬ 
veloping a whole new category of 
hypnotic drugs safer than the power¬ 
ful habit-forming barbiturates and 
still strong enough to induce sleep. 
The promising new leads have come 


from animal experiments with a 
chemical called tertiary amyl alcohol. 
This substance, known since 1890, 
seems to meet some of the require¬ 
ments for the long-sought-for ideal 
hypnotic drug in that it is not habit 
forming, and does not have some of 
the disagreeable aftereffects associ¬ 
ated with barbiturates. Compounds 
of this drug produced satisfactory 
results. See also tranquilizing 
drugs; poisoning. 

BARIUM SULPHATE, a com¬ 
pound formed by barium and sul¬ 
phuric acid, used as a pigment and 
as a flUer in such products as paper 
and rubber. It is also invaluable in 
taking roentgenograms of the stom¬ 
ach and intestines, because, when 
taken by mouth, it renders those 
organs opaque to x-rays, and subse¬ 
quently the drug passes unchanged 
through the gastrointestinal tract. 
Barium sulphate should be carefully 
distinguished from barium sulphide 
and sulphite, which are poisonous. 

BARLOW’S DISEASE. rickets; 
scurvy; vitamins. 

BASAL GANGLIA, groups of nerve 
cells, situated internally in the brain 
substance. They control inherited 
basic emotions and deter muscles 
from certain movements which 
would occur if this area of" the brain 
were injured. 

BASAL METABOLISM. Metabo¬ 
lism is the conversion of food into 
energy in a living body. Basal me¬ 
tabolism is a measure of the chemical 
changes involved in the body at rest. 
The basal metabolic rate measures 



the speed at which basic, constant 
processes within the body are taking 
place and, in particular, how much 
oxygen a person uses in a given time. 
4 normal male between the ages of 
20 and 50 produces 38 to 40 calories 
of heat every hour for every square 
meter of body surface, or about 1 
:aiory per kilogram of body weight, 
rhis figure does not vary with 
leight, weight, or general body size 
n healthy men. The basal metabo- 
ism indicates whether or not heat is 
oroduced at a greater or smaller rate 
han is normal for most people in 
ieveloping energy from food and 
)xygen. 

When a basal metabolism test is 
nade, the person rests after arising 
a the morning, without having had 
my breakfast, and breathes from a 
ank containing a measured amount 
tf air. The rate at which the oxygen 
a that air is consumed indicates the 
evei of the basal metabolism. A 
ange of 7 plus to 7 minus, relative 
0 the average, is considered normal, 
lome persons, however, have rates as 
3W as 25 minus without ill-effect on 
tieir health. Children who are active 
nd growing have a noticeably higher 
ate than the average. Various factors 
ause the basal metabolic rate to be 
reater than normal. Intense emo- 
ons, such as fright or rage, speed up 
le metabolism, as do certain dis- 
ases, such as hyperthyroidism. 
Lowered basal metabolism is noted 
1 such bodily states as sleep or un- 
emourishment. It is also found in 
ersons who are anemic, have certain 
ervous disorders or thyroid de- 
ciency. Inadequacy of either the 


pituitary or the adrenal gland may 
have the same effect, while excessive 
action by either can'raise the basal 
metabolism. 

The basal metabolism of a preg¬ 
nant woman remains at its usual level 
until the last two or three months 
before birth. Then the rate in this 
period will represent the combined 
metabolism of both mother and child. 

In contrast to physical exertion, 
mental exercise has little effect on 
the metabolism. According to one 
authority, half of a salted peanut 
would provide all the extra calories 
needed to support a full hour of in¬ 
tense mental concentration. 

BASEDOW’S DISEASE. See ex¬ 
ophthalmic goiter; goiter. 

BCG VACCINE. The letters BCG 
indicate the bacillus first noted by 
Calmette and Guerin, two researchers 
of the Pasteur Institute, It is a vac¬ 
cine used as a means of increasing 
resistance to tuberculosis, which is 
spread chiefly from one person who 
has it to those who have not. 

The vaccine is made from a bovine 
strain of tubercle bacilli, weakened 
by growth on potato glycerin and bile 
for several years. The supporters of 
BCG vaccine point out that it has 
been successfully used on many mil¬ 
lions of children and adults all over 
the world. See also immunization. 

BATHING, the total or partial im¬ 
mersion of the body in a medium 
such as air, vapor, sand, or water, in 
order to cleanse, soothe, stimulate, 
heat, cool or irritate it. 

Bathing habits of people vary ac- 



BED AND BEDDING 


BED AND BEDDING 


cording to their habits and living 
conditions. The routine use of soap 
for cleansing is recent. In ancient 
times, people oiled the skin, and 
sometimes cleansed themselves with 
a sweat, or Turkish steam, bath. Soap 
cleanses the skin by breaking up or 
emulsifying the oily secretions and 
then dissolving them. Thus the layer 
of grease is removed and the ac¬ 
cumulated dirt along with it. 

For cleansing the body, a moder¬ 
ately warm bath or shower—^from 
95° to 100° F.—^with soap is best, 
with thorough washing of portions 
of the body likely to perspire and 
acquire odor. Usually the best cleans¬ 
ing soap is ordinary white soap which 
is easily rubbed into a lather. A soft 
washcloth helps to cleanse parts of 
the body difficult to reach. The soap 
lather should be thoroughly washed 
from the body with plenty of water 
since soap left on the skin may ir¬ 
ritate it. Brisk rubbing with a towel 
stimulates circulation and will not 
injure ordinary skin. However, 
patting dry with a soft towel is better 
than rubbing the body if the skin is 
delicate. 

Persons with extremely dry, sensi¬ 
tive, or itching skin may irritate the 
condition by excessive numbers of 
hot soapy baths; in many cases, a 
mad cleansing and oiling is sufficient. 

Cool baths conduct heat away 
from the body and are often recom¬ 
mended to lower the temperature in 
fever. Hot water causes ddation of the 
superficial blood vessels and such ex¬ 
cess stimulation causes profuse 
sweating. In taking a hot-water bath, 
the temperature should be about 98° 


at the start and then be increased to 
115°. Remaining too long in a hot 
bath may lead to exhaustion and even 
collapse. A quick cold shower or 
bath, often called a tonic bath, is 
stimulating because of the sudden 
change in temperature which pro¬ 
duces an immediate contraction of 
the blood vessels. After the tonic 
bath, rubbing the body vigorously 
with a rough towel adds to the 
stimulation. A cold shower or bath 
does not agree with many people, 
and there is no evidence that it is 
particularly healthful or that it will 
harden the body against catching 
colds. See also hygiene; skin. 

BED AND BEDDING. The bed, 
the mattress, and the pillows should 
be designed to give proper support as 
well as comfort in health and in 
sickness. The mattress should usually 
be rather hard to give back support. 
Many good beds, springs, and cover¬ 
ings are available. In the case of long 
illness, a hospital bed is preferable, 
for it permits the head and feet of 
the patient to be raised or lowered, 
is of correct height for the person 
giving nursing care, and can be 
easily moved from place to place on 
its casters. During illness, the bed 
should be placed where the opening 
of the door does not cause a draft. 
If the windows or door are open, a 
screen should be placed before the 
bed. For tall patients, a chair can 
be used to extend the bed. Kitchen 
chairs tied together and placed 
against the side of the bed wiU safe¬ 
guard the patient against falling out 
of bed. 



OEUtlU(9 


The mattress should be covered by 
a rubber sheet as well as a draw 
sheet to protect it when using a bed- 
pan or giving a bed bath. A draw 
sheet which extends from the 
patient’s shoulder to the knees can 
easily be removed when soiled. 

Cotton sheets should be of suf¬ 
ficient length and width so that they 
can be carefully tucked in on the 
sides and at the bottom of the bed. 
Wool blankets, warm but lightweight, 
are preferable. 

The general condition and the type 
of disease from which the patient is 
suffering will determine the number 
of pillows on the bed, and the advice 
of the physician should be followed. 
Pillows should be thin and light, and 
frequently shaken and aired in a 
shady place. 

If the patient is bedridden, the 
task of making up the bed becomes 
more diflScult. Whenever possible, 
the patient should be moved into an¬ 
other bed beside his own bed. If the 
patient can be moved, he should be 
assisted to a footstool or chair next 
to the bed. If this is not possible, and 
the bed must be made up with the 
patient in it, follow these directions. 
Remove the blankets, pillows, and 
top sheet. Cover the patient with the 
blanket and loosen the bottom sheet 
and the draw sheet. Roll the patient 
onto his side, on the right side of 
the bed, and push the soiled sheets 
toward the patient, so that they are 
next to his back. Smooth the mattress 
pad and rubber sheet, making sure 
that they are not wrinkled or creased. 
Spread the clean sheet the length of 
the bed, and fold the half of the sheet 


on which the patient is lying next to 
his back on top of the sheets which 
are to be removed. Then begin at the 
foot of the bed to tuck the sheet un¬ 
der the mattress, being sure to make 
a square comer at the foot and head 
of the bed. Put half of the draw 
sheet on, tucking it under the mat¬ 
tress and leaving half of it free for 
the other side of the bed. Then help 
the patient roll over onto the clean 
sheets, and proceed to make the other 
side of the bed in the same manner. 
First remove the soiled sheets. 
Smooth out the rubber sheet and 
mattress pad. Then tuck the bottom 
sheet and draw sheet under the mat¬ 
tress. Place the top sheet over the 
blanket, remove the blanket, and 
tuck the sheet in at the foot of the 
bed. Replace the blankets, tucking 
them in at the foot, and change the 
pillow cases and replace the pillows 
on the bed. 

A bedridden patient may best be 
shifted with the aid of soft pillows, 
air cushions, blankets, or similar 
materials to hold him in a different 
position. 

BEDBUG, a common domestic in¬ 
sect pest; small, wingless, and light 
brown in color. Although it feeds on 
the blood of human beings, it is not, 
strictly speaking, a human parasite. 
It comes to the human skin only for 
its food and may, in the absence of 
human beings, feed on other warm¬ 
blooded animals. The bedbug lives in 
the crevices of bedsteads, floors, 
walls, wallpaper, and furniture. 
Usually it is carried from house to 
house on clothing and bedding, but 
it may also travel from one dwelling 



BED SORES 


BED SORES 


to another in search of nourishment. 

Several insect bites resemble one 
another, but bedbug wheals, swollen 
inflamed areas surrounding central 
puncture spots, may be distinguished 
from those of mosquitoes because 
they seem to be limited to one area 
and to follow a track. 

Aside from constituting a nuisance 
and secreting a mildly unpleasant 
odor from their glands, the species, 
cimex lectularis, common to the tem¬ 
perate zone, may also be the carrier 
of such diseases as kala azar, Euro¬ 
pean relapsing fever, and, according 
to certain experiments, plague and 
tularemia. 

Because their area of operation is 
limited, bedbugs seem to be minor 
pests compared to mosquitoes, yet 
are sufl&ciently prolific and hardy to 
defy nonchemical attempts at ex¬ 
termination. A bedbug can live as 
long as six weeks without any 
nourishment. The female lays 200 
eggs from three to four times an¬ 
nually, in batches of approximately 
fifty. The larvae hatch in from one 
to three weeks, grow slowly, and ma¬ 
ture in six weeks to six months; the 
young moult five times at intervals 
of eight days leaving characteristic 
shells. Usually a 5 per cent spray of 
DDT, or one of the better extermi¬ 
nating preparations on the market, 
will be eflflcient. 

BED SORES. A bed sore is a degen¬ 
eration of skin at a particular spot, 
which exposes underlying tissues and 
invites infection. At first glance, it 
may seem rather insignificant but 
actually, in a bedridden paralytic or 


aged person, bed sores are potentially 
so serious that nurses and doctors 
must continually guard against them. 
They are much easier to prevent than 
to treat. 

Those persons most susceptible to 
bed sores are the chronically sick and 
the people affected by specific dis¬ 
orders of the nervous system. Pro¬ 
tracted pressure on a particular area 
of skin, especially such as occurs 
from lying in one position too long, 
is the immediate factor. 

Once established, a bed sore causes 
degeneration of tissues in the area 
involved, and ultimately leads to 
ulceration. Expert medical care for 
such condition is imperative to pre¬ 
vent extensive damage in the area 
of the ulcer. 

The weight of a human body, no 
matter what its position, presses 
against the body’s outer surface 
unevenly. Standing, the heels get 
most of the pressure; and sitting, the 
buttocks, the lower end of the spine, 
the upper parts of the hip bones and 
the thighs receive it. Lying down, the 
areas bearing the greatest pressure 
will depend, again, on the exact pos¬ 
ture, but will usually include the 
shoulders, buttocks, and thighs. 

Tissues that are not healthful tend 
to break down when subjected to 
more than to two pounds per 
square inch for any length of time. 
An average man weighs approxi¬ 
mately 150 pounds, and the weight is 
usually focused in some of the spots 
indicated. The risk of tissue damage 
and resulting bed sores in a bedridden 
patient is obvious. 

Bed sores may be prevented by 





oGiui. a r#%i.aT 


A person who has had multiple bee 
stings or is known to be sensitive 
should immediately rest, and the 
action of the heart and kidneys must 
be carefully watched. If the blood 
pressure falls too rapidly, and such 
symptoms as swelling of the body or 
collapse appear, a physician should 
be called. He must also be consulted 
promptly if the sting is on the tongue 
or in any other very sensitive place. 
He can give relief by injecting or 
applying locally such antihistamines 
as Benadryl, Pyribenzamine, or Neo- 
hetramine. 

Generally, and especially in the 
case of children, the stinger should 
be removed with tweezers, if possible. 
For relief of itching, a paste of bak¬ 
ing soda, well-diluted ammonia, or 
soothing lotions may be applied. 
Vinegar is beneficial in stings of 
wasps, hornets and yellow jackets. 
The wounds of insect bites should 
never be scratched. 

BELCHING, the eructation of sour 
substances, including acid of the 
stomach, air, or gas. People who eat 
too fast swallow air and then belch it 
back. 

Belching has become a recognized 
part of baby care and has brought a 
new word into our language, burping. 
In nursing, especially with the bottle, 
the baby swallows quantities of air. 
As the small capacity of his stomach 
does not allow for air bubbles, these 
cause pressure and pain. The process 
of assisting the baby to bring up the 
bubbles is called “burping the baby.” 

In cases of cancer of the larynx, 
when the larynx is removed, belching 


is necessary so that the patient can 
learn to speak by the esophageal 
method. To help him acquire this 
skill, the patient is encouraged to 
drink carbonated water. It brings air 
into his mouth and thus he can cause 
it to vibrate against the roof of the 
pharynx. 

BELLADONNA. See deadly night¬ 
shade POISONING. 

BELL’S PALSY, paralysis of the 
muscles of one or both sides of the 
face. Rarely are both sides af¬ 
fected, nor is any other organ of the 
body involved. Charles Bell, a Scot¬ 
tish physician, first described the 
condition early in the nineteenth 
century, but its cause is still not defi¬ 
nitely established. Drafts or over¬ 
exposure to cold have been alleged as 
causes of this condition, but this be¬ 
lief also has not been proved. 

A mild pain in the eye, ear, or face 
often precedes Bell’s palsy. The 
paralysis develops so abruptly that 
frequently the person affected realizes 
it only by a feeling of numbness and 
stiffness on one side of the face. 
Within a few hours the eye on that 
side seems to be more widely open 
than the other eye. It cannot be 
closed and waters excessively. The 
mouth is drawn over to the side of 
the face and speech is impaired. 
Eating is disturbed, chewing or swal¬ 
lowing is difficult, and taste is dulled. 
Sensitivity to sound may also be 
abnormal. 

Milder cases generally clear within 
a month or two, and in about 85 to 
90 per cent of the cases complete 



BtMAUKTL 


BERIBERI 


recovery ensues. In the more severe 
cases, in which severe paralysis has 
occurred, improvement is much 
slower and more limited. Taste may 
be lost on the front two-thirds of the 
tongue, and muscles which remain 
affected after many months are apt 
to be permanently weakened. In such 
instances, muscular movement, such 
as blinking the eye, may be ac¬ 
companied by a twitching of the 
comer of the mouth or of the muscles 
of the neck. 

Patients with Bell’s palsy are cau¬ 
tioned to keep the eyes protected at 
aU times against dust or foreign 
bodies, since sensation is lost during 
the active stages when the eyelids 
cannot close. Physicians recommend 
a drop of mineral oil in the eye, 
morning and evening, to keep it 
clean. To prevent permanent sagging 
of the facial muscles, physiotherapy 
and facial massage at frequent inter¬ 
vals are advised until the muscles be¬ 
gin to indicate resumption of their 
normal functions. Splints have been 
devised to support the sagging 
tissues, and electric stimulation may 
be used during this period although it 
should be discontinued as soon as 
the muscles show signs of recupera¬ 
tion. Cortisone seems to be effective 
in shortening the duration of the palsy 
and in making recovery more com¬ 
plete. Surgery is sometimes tried in 
more stubborn cases, but the results 
have not been uniformly successful. 

BENADRYL, an antihistaminic drug 
which opposes the action of a sub¬ 
stance called histamine which is re¬ 
leased into the tissues by allergy or 
sensitivity. It is used in allergic condi¬ 


tions like hay fever, asthma, urticaria, 
contact dermatitis, erythema, rhinitis, 
drug sensitization, serum reactions, 
and irradiation sickness. It has also 
been used to relieve motion sickness. 

“BENDS.” See caisson disease. 

BENZEDRINE, the trade name for 
amphetamine, a potent stimulant 
usually taken orally in tablet form, 
and rarely injected. This drug has a 
powerful action on the brain, in ad¬ 
dition to its ability to cause physi¬ 
ological changes similar to those pro¬ 
duced by action of the sympathetic 
nervous system. In a milder form, 
Benzedrine parallels the effect of 
cocaine. This drug is prescribed by 
physicians as a stimulant and to cut 
down appetite in obesity. An amphet¬ 
amine produces a sensation of well¬ 
being so intense that the user is not 
interested in food. This property of 
the drug has led to its utilization in 
weight-reduction programs, some¬ 
times promiscuously, without a 
physician’s direction. 

The abuse of Benzedrine has be¬ 
come common among alcoholics, 
barbiturate addicts, and thrill seekers 
who turn to the amphetamines for the 
delusive sense of well-being and con¬ 
fidence that they cannot find for 
themselves. Among the symptoms of 
overdose and of chronic poisoning 
are nervousness, apprehension, trem¬ 
ors, insomnia, hypertension, and 
dilatation of the pupils of the eyes. 
Hallucinations and delusions of a 
paranoid type may be a psychotic 
consequence. 

BERIBERI, a deficiency disease re- 



suiting from an inadequacy of vi¬ 
tamin or thiamine in the diet. This 
condition was first brought to public 
attention in countries with limited 
diets, where the population subsisted 
on polished rice. In 1897 Dr. 
Eijkman, a Dutch physician in Java, 
observed forms of neuritis and 
paralysis among chickens fed on 
polished rice, and found that they 
were absent in chickens fed on whole 
rice. Shortly thereafter, a British 
doctor in Malaya noticed the same 
symptoms among human beings sub¬ 
sisting mainly on white rice. 

As polished rice is the main article 
of diet in the Orient, incidence of 
beriberi is greatest there. The bran of 
the rice grams contains sufficient 
thiamin, but this bran is often thrown 
away with the outer portion, which 
also contains the protein and fat. 
Such deficiency in a milder form 
also exists in Western countries be¬ 
cause of inadequacies in the diet. 
Typical symptoms include water¬ 
logging of the heart and disturbances 
of sensation in the extremities. 

Beriberi attacks the gastrointestinal 
tract and causes changes in the 
nervous system. Manifestations of 
this disease are multiple neuritis, 
paralysis, progressive edema, inflam¬ 
mation of the nerves, collection of 
fluids in the legs, changes in the 
adrenal glands, mental deterioration, 
and heart failure. In addition, there 
is a tingling and numbness in the 
portions of thef body reached by the 
nerves affected, tenderness of the 
muscles, wastiag of the tissues 
through secondary infections, fever, 
and general wealmess and disability. 


Beriberi was once prevalent in the 
Far East and parts of Brazil, New¬ 
foundland, and Labrador, and also 
on ships making long voyages. Since 
the cause of the disease has been 
discovered, it is now rare. Neverthe¬ 
less, it is possible that a relative de¬ 
ficiency of thiamine m the diet may 
produce a mild form of the disease. 

Occasionally invalids on greatly re¬ 
stricted diets suffer from a deficiency 
of thiamine. After surgical operations 
on the bowel, in cases of chronic 
diarrhea, ulcers of the stomach, 
chronic alcoholism, or after long in¬ 
fectious diseases, signs of thiamine 
deficiency may appear. Food fad¬ 
dists, living on incomplete diets, may 
show a moderate form of beriberi, 
and chronic alcoholics, who stop eat¬ 
ing during their periods of drinking, 
often manifest the same symptoms. 

BICEPS usually refers to the large 
muscle on the front of the upper arm. 
The name is derived from the fact 
that it has two heads, one long and 
one short, which are attached to the 
shoulder blade at two different points. 
On muscular people, these two heads 
unite and swell out into a single 
large muscle. When this muscle con¬ 
tracts, it bends the forearm toward 
the upper arm and is therefore used 
in all lifting and pulling motions. 
Another bicep muscle in the human 
body is located at the back of the 
thigh. 

BICHLORIDE OF MERCURY, a 
compound of two equivalents of 
chlorine with mercury; highly poison¬ 
ous when swallowed. In a weak solu¬ 
tion it is a germicide. Taken internally 



BICUSPID 


BILHARZIASIS 



it produces serious inflammation of 
the kidney and a general poisoning of 
the peripheral nerves, with paralysis 
of the limbs. See also poisoning. 

BICUSPID, a tooth with two cusps, 
or points. An adult with a full set 
of teeth has two bicuspids between 
each canine and first molar, eight in 
all. The bicuspid is often called pre- 
molar. See also teeth. 

BIFOCAL, a system of lenses with 
double focus. Those who need dif¬ 
ferent glasses for near and distant 
vision can have the proper lenses 
combined in a single pair of glasses. 
The smaller lens, for near vision, is 
placed below the center of the larger 
lens, which is for distant vision. 
These are called bifocal lenses and 
J are said to have been invented by 
Benjamin Franklin. 

BILE, a bitter, bright golden-red 
fluid, manufactured in the liver and 
excreted into the intestines. Its func¬ 
tion is the digestion of fat and its 
absorption from the intestines. It 
stimulates movements of the intes¬ 
tines, prevents fermentation of the 
contents, and serves as a disinfectant. 
Bile is essential for the absorption of 
vitamins A, D, E, and K, and is 
also known to have a mild laxative 
effect in its salt form. 

The amount of bile secreted daily 
by a healthy liver varies from twenty 
to thirty ounces; a diseased liver may 
not secrete bile properly. Although 
secretion of bile is continuous, it is 
more active directly after meals. 
Whenever there is an interval in the 
digestive process, bile accumulates in 



the gallbladder, a bag-shaped organ 
that projects from the tubes that 
carry bile from the liver to the in¬ 
testines. When required again, bile 
is poured into the intestines. The 
necessary stimulus to the renewed 
flow is given by the passage of the 
acid contents of the stomach over the 
intestmai orifice of the common bile 
duct. 

Bile consists of water, bile salts, a 
little fat, which in part is lecithin, 
and pigments. Cholesterin is another 
ingredient, which appears to be a 
fatty substance but is actually an alco¬ 
hol. Together with other elements 
found in bile, cholesterin is the basis 
of formation of gallstones in the gall¬ 
bladder or the biliary ducts. Passage 
of these stones through the ducts is- 
connected with painful spasms known 
as biliary colic. 

Any obstruction of the flow of bile 
into the intestines results in the ab¬ 
sorption of the secretion into the 
blood, and jaundice occurs when it 
accumulates there. See also diges¬ 
tion; jaundice; liver. 

BILHARZIASIS, a disease caused by 
a parasite. Schistosoma haematobium, 
a genus of trematode worms, which 
gets into the human body, principally 
when people swim in contaminated 
waters. The intermediary host of this 
worm is the fresh-water snail. The 
condition has previously been a tropi¬ 
cal disease, and apparently originated 
in the Nile Valley thousands of years 
ago. When the parasite gets into the 
skin, it produces an inflammation. 
Then the eggs get into the human 
bladder and other hollow organs of 



the body, where ulcers and inflam¬ 
mations occur. Certain specific drugs, 
like emetine and those of antimony, 
will eliminate this parasitic blood 
fluke from the human body. Re¬ 
peated infections in the intestine, 
however, will cause ulcers and bleed¬ 
ing. The worst form, which is severe 
and which may lead eventuafly to 
death, is the Asiatic variety. 

BILIOUSNESS, in popular usage, a 
condition of digestive disturbance 
accompanied by headache, nausea, 
constipation, thick tongue, and other 
similar complaints. The word is scien¬ 
tifically a misnomer and rarely en¬ 
countered in medical literature. It 
goes back to the time, centuries ago, 
when illness was interpreted in terms 
of “humors,” of which bile was con¬ 
sidered the worst. 

The amount of bile in the body 
actually has little or nothing to do 
with whether or not a person is 
“bilious.” Symptoms that accompany 
“biliousness” are due to one or more 
of many different specific causes. If 
the disorder is serious and demands 
treatment, the doctor must determine 
the cause in order to prescribe cor¬ 
rectly. The term “bilious” does not 
convey any pertinent information 
except to suggest the presence of 
certain symptoms. Excessively rich 
food, migraine, eye strain, ^aucoma, 
brain tumor, or other conditions may 
provoke the symptoms. Liver in¬ 
fections, by ameba or organisms of 
malaria may be the source of the 
trouble. Hardening of the liver from 
various causes is another possibility. 
Severe infections induce destruction 
of liver cells. The liver has a safety 


factor of unusual size—^in fact, seven 
times as large as necessary for mini¬ 
mum requirements—but even this 
margin can be endangered by per¬ 
sistent abuse through eating and 
drinking. The person who suffers 
from “biliousness” usually has dis¬ 
comfort and loss of well-being with¬ 
out particularly severe pain. He is 
easily tired and disinclined to work. 
The symptoms often disappear at 
midday when the person develops an 
increased appetite. 

Sufferers of “biliousness” will feel 
more comfortable if they avoid rich 
foods such as pastry, chocolate, 
candy, and eat more protein-rich 
food. Alcohol should be omitted. 
Glucose, taken either by mouth or 
injected, will provide relief. 

BILIRUBIN, orange-red crystals or 
powder which constitute the main pig¬ 
ment of bile. The crystals are nor¬ 
mally present in feces or excrement 
and are also found in the urine in 
cases of obstructive jaundice. Bili¬ 
rubin is sometimes injected into the 
veins as a test of liver function. See 
also BILE. 

BINET-SIMON TEST. The Binet- 
Simon test is a method of testing the 
mental capacity of children. In 1908, 
after experiments with large groups 
of school children, the French psy¬ 
chologist, Alfred Binet, introduced 
the first systematic intelligence test. 
A revised form of Binet’s scale was 
issued in 1911 in collaboration with 
Theodore Simon. The method pro¬ 
vides groups of questions and prob¬ 
lems, suitable for the mental age 
of the subject. On the basis of these 



BIOPSY 


BIOPSY 


tests aod a standard developed for 
normal subjects, a psychologist can 
quickly determine whether or not a 
child is advanced, retarded or normal 
in relation to his own age group. The 
original Binet-Simon tests have been 
the subject of many more recent 
modifications. See I.Q. 

BIOPSY, the removal and examina¬ 
tion, usually under a microscope, for 
diagnosis of material from the living 
body. This material may be removed 
by means of a needle, punch, sponge, 
or other instrument. Surface biopsy 
involves the microscopic study of 
cells which have been scraped from 
the surface of suspected areas. This 
technique is frequently employed 


♦ **' d- 

^ t i 


hW 




The Stab Wound—A stab wound is made. 
The hole will facilitate the introduction of 
the special instrument. 




■ 




] 






* 


Insertion — The instrument is introduced 
into the wound and knee. 


Biopsy of Knee — By means of a special 
instrument plunged into the knee through 
the skin, pieces of tissue ond fluid can be 
removed for diagnostic purposes. This tech¬ 
nic is called punch-biopsy. The knee is ex¬ 
posed and the surgeon has his instruments 
ready. 




Coilectisig IFiiiicI—Fluid in fhe knee flows 
out through the instrument and is collected 
in a test-tube The fluid will be examined 
later in fhe laboratory. 


Extracting fissoe—The knife edge of fhe 
instrument is rotated in the knee to pick op 
pieces of tissue. 


Extracting Tissue—Tissue is extracted and 
placed on clean glass slides. 






Exaiwliicifi®ii — By examining the cells in 
the tissue the doctor is able to diagnose the 
disease in the knee. 





Biopsy Complete — Photograph showing 
puncture wounds of several biopsies which 
were performed 

when examining tor cancer of the 
uterus or bowel. Scrapings are also 
studied, including those from the 
stomach, intestines, or other tissues. 

BIRTH CERTIFICATE, the written, 
authenticated record required by law 
of the birth of a child, whether at 
home or at the hospital and reported 
by the doctor or the midwife to the 
local registrar or the Bureau of Vital 
Statistics. The birth is placed in a 
permanent record and a certificate 
is issued to the parents. A name for a 
boy or girl should be picked before¬ 
hand so that the certificate is com¬ 
plete and accurate. If a child dies 
during birth, an immediate certificate 
is demanded. This certificate must 
contain not only a statement of the 
cause of death, but also any second¬ 
ary causes which have been noted. 

The birth certificate is of great 
importance on many occasions. Proof 
of parentage is reqiured when a 
person applies for citizenship, a 
government position, passport, en¬ 
trance to school or coEege, and on 
many other occasions. Therefore, a 
birth certificate or a certified copy 


should always be on hand. As the 
birth certificate is so significant 
throughout life, some certified copies 
should be made with the original. If 
a certificate is not received by the 
parents in due time, the delay should 
be checked with the local Board of 
Health. 

If any person does not have a birth 
certificate and if he knows where and 
when he was bom, he should write to 
the city clerk in the place concerned 
and on payment of a small fee obtain 
a copy of his birth certificate. 

BIRTH INJURIES. Hazards to the 
well-being of an infant while it is 
still in the womb ot the mother may 
result from an injury or disease dur¬ 
ing pregnancy. Other dangers may 
develop during the birth itself, or 
just after birth. The brain of the baby 
may remain undeveloped, or birth 
injuries may be of varying degree. 
In some instances, delivery is has¬ 
tened to safeguard mother and child, 
or forceps applied to the baby’s 
head before it appears at the opening 
of the birth canal, methods which 
can, in some cases, cause birth in¬ 
juries. 

Even a normal birth subjects the 
skull and brain of the baby to much 
possible trauma. In the case of pre¬ 
mature births, the chance of injury is 
even greater. The softer bones of the 
premature baby do not protect the 
brain as weE as the harder ones 
of the fuH-term infant; thus intra¬ 
cranial injuries are more frequent. So 
many factors are involved that physi¬ 
cians find it difficult to diagnose 
certain afflictions as being due to 
birth or postnatal injuries. Such 


7 1f\ 



BIRTH INJURIES 

traumas of the brain at birth are 
responsible for at least one-third of 
all infant fatalities during the first 
two weeks of life. 

Bleeding into the brain is a fre¬ 
quent cause of immediate disturb¬ 
ances in the newborn infant, or even 
of death. A tendeney to these intra¬ 
cranial hemorrhages in the newborn 
wiU increase the peril of even the 
slightest injury to the baby as well as 
to the pregnant mother. While frac¬ 
tures of the skull of newborn babies 
are rare, pressure on the skull occurs 
with consequent contusions and cere¬ 
bral injuries not accompanied by 
hemorrhages. Irreparable damage to 
the brain may be the result of a 
premature separation of the placenta, 
or twisting of the cord and an inade¬ 
quate oxygen supply. Birth injuries 


BIRTH INJURIES 



Eirtii Iwjuries — Prevention of blindness 
All babies, at birth, are given a drop of 
silver nitrate solution m each eye to prevent 
blindness which may result from gonococcal 
infection Photograph shows the nurse ad¬ 
ministering silver nitratefo a newborn baby. 



Birth—Models of heads of babies before and after moulding The bones in the head of the 
fetus are not fused During birth these bones overlap, making the head longer and smaller 
which enables it to adapt to the pelvic canal and emerge more easily through the canal 
After birth the head is gradually moulded to a normal shape 




Multiple Birtli — Two-egg fwins fleffJ. These are fraternal twins. There are two placentas 
and each fetus has two sacs, the amnion inside and the chorion outside. Fraternal twins 
result from the fertilization of two separate ova by two separate sperm. The sex of these 
babies may be different. Two-egg twins (center) The two placentas have merged. Each fetus 
has both membranes, amnion and chorion. The sex may be different. One-egg twins (right). 
There is one placenta. Each fetus has the inner sac, amnion. A single outer membrane, the 
chorion, envelops both fetuses. The sex is the same and they are called identical twins. It is not 
quite understood why a single fertilized egg will divide to produce two individuals. 


of the infants survived. Sextuplet 
births have been reported on five 
occasions, without survivals. Twins 
are extremely common among Ne¬ 
groes, and least common in Orientals. 
Frequency of twins seems to be re¬ 
lated to heredity factors in both 
parents, and is more often seen in 
women past thirty who have had 
large families. If a woman has had 
one set of twins, she is ten times as 
likely as other women to have another 
set. 

Twins may develop from one egg, 
in which case they are identical in 
sex, appearance, and mental capacity; 
or they may Arise from the fertiliza¬ 
tion of two separate eggs, the more 
common type, in which case they 
may not necessarily be of the same 
sex and will resemble each other no 


more than ordinary siblings. Identical 
twins occur about 25 per cent of the 
time, while fraternal twins occur in 
75 per cent of the cases. 

Twins are frequently born early, 
80 per cent within three weeks of 
term and less than 50 per cent reach¬ 
ing the ninth month. Although the 
size of each baby is apt to be smaller 
than those of normal birth, the com¬ 
bined weight often considerably ex¬ 
ceeds the weight of a singly born 
baby. 

Because complications of preg¬ 
nancy occur more often with twim, 
women expecting multiple births 
should cooperate closely with their 
physickofi as regards weight gain, 
frequent rest periods, and other hy¬ 
gienic measures. 

Perhaps the most famous of all 



BISMUTH 


BLADDER DISEASES 


multiple births are the Dionne quin¬ 
tuplets in Callander, Ontario. 

BISMUTH, one of the elementary 
bodies, a hard white crystalline metal 
with a reddish tint. Its derivatives are 
used chiefly in medicine as contract¬ 
ing agents for the mucous membranes 
and as sedatives, antiseptics, and 
neutralizing substances for the stom¬ 
ach and the bowels. 

Bismuth subcarbonate, for ex¬ 
ample, may be employed by the 
physician in food poisoning, in case 
of chronic gastritis, and for vomiting 
in indigestion. 

Compounds of bismuth with arse¬ 
nic were once used in the treatment 
of syphilis, but have been replaced 
by the newer drugs, especially peni¬ 
cillin. 

BLACKWATER FEVER, a tropical 
disease which occurs almost exclu¬ 
sively among members of the Cau¬ 
casian race, and is limited in the 
United States to the South. Ap¬ 
parently produced by small in¬ 
tracellular parasites in the blood, it is 
infectious and often fatal. Among 
the symptoms are irregular fever, 
chills, vomiting, jaundice, and labored 
breathing, with nephritis as a com¬ 
plication. 

BLACK WIDOW SPIDER, the fe¬ 
male of a common American variety; 
it gets its name from its shining 
black body and its habit of devouring 
its mate. Its bite is exceedingly 
poisonous. This notorious spider 
exists in a wide area, extending aH 
the way from Canada to Chile, and 
is easily recognized by the scarlet 


hour-glass figure on its beUy. It is 
about half an inch long; the male is 
considerably smaller. 

The black widow is one of the few 
spiders whose fangs, through which 
the venom is discharged, can actually 
penetrate the human skin. The first 
evidence of such penetration is a 
sharp pain and a swelling and redness 
in the bitten area. Dizziness and 
weakness are soon felt, with a trem¬ 
bling of the legs and frequently stom¬ 
ach cramps. Other s 5 miptoms may in¬ 
clude inability to urinate, reduction 
of the heart beat, a feeble pulse, and 
difficulty in breathing and speaking. 
Delirium may also occur. In some 
instances the bite hris been known 
to cause death. 

After the patient has been placed 
in bed, the physician will often inject 
medication into the veins to reduce 
the pain. Ordinarily, immune serum 
will then be administered. 

The black widow should be 
avoided and never disturbed. Her 
web is frequently foimd in caves, 
under rocks, and at the base of 
posts or lumber piles. Insecticides are 
effective in destroying the spiders in 
these areas. 

BLADDER, urinary, a hollow mus¬ 
cular organ which serves as a reser¬ 
voir for urine. See also bladder 

DISEASES. 

BLADDER DISEASES. The term 
bladder designates two organs of the 
body: the urinary bladder, a sac 
which receives urine from the kidneys 
and holds it temporarily until voided; 
and the gallbladder, a similar struc- 



ture which stores a supply of bile, 
manufactured by the liver for use in 
digestion. The term bladder used by 
itself usually refers to the urinary 
bladder. 

The kidneys deposit urine in the 
bladder at the rate of about thirty 
drops a minute through two tubes, 
the ureters, each about a foot long 
and a fifth of an inch in diameter. 
The passage through which urine is 
excreted from the bladder and from 
the body is the urethra, a tube about 
eight inches long in the male and an 
inch and a half in the female. 

The urinary bladder and the 
urethra are susceptible to a number 
of diseases and accidents. Either one 
may become inflamed or infected. 
New and abnormal growths may 
occur in or on the bladder, it may 
form stones, or it may be bruised or 
ruptured. 

Inflammation of the bladder is 
known scientifically as cystitis. It can 
occur in either acute or chronic form 
and from many different causes. 
Cystitis is much more common in the 
female because the shortness of the 
urethra affords invasive organisms 
easier access than in the male. An 
inflamed bladder is almost always re¬ 
lated to a previous infection, above 
or below the bladder, in the urinary 
tract, or to an obstruction. Infection 
in the bladder alone, without in¬ 
fection elsewhere, is a rarity. 

A common source of infection is 
an obstruction to the normal flow of 
urine, such as tends to occur in 
elderly people or anyone of advanced 
years who is bedridden. An enlarged 
prostate gland may affect a male in a 


similar way. Sometimes the offending 
factor is bacteria introduced on a 
catheter which has not been properly 
cleaned. Older men who must be 
catheterized frequently practically 
always develop some cystitis. 

Symptoms of cystitis are undue 
frequency of urination, a burning 
sensation when voiding, and some¬ 
times the appearance of blood in the 
urine. Persistent desire to void after 
retiring therefore calls for careful 
medical investigation. Bladder in¬ 
fection usually is not accompanied 
by fever, and a normal temperature 
is not an assurance that an infection 
may not be present. 

Diagnosis of a bladder inflamma¬ 
tion usually demands a number of 
tests which include examinations of 
the urine taken at various times 
over the full 24-hour period, espe¬ 
cially for the presence of bacteria, 
pus, or solids. Frequently dye stuffs 
are used to determine the body’s 
ability to excrete fluid. In addition, 
the condition of the prostate gland 
will be sought. 

One of the remarkable achieve¬ 
ments of modern medicine is the 
development of an extraordinary 
instrument, the cystoscope, to aid in 
making such a diagnosis. Through 
this, the doctor can actually look at 
the inside of the bladder. The cys¬ 
toscope, a long tube with a light at its 
end, is passed into the bladder 
through the urethra. Fluid is then 
injected into the bladder by way of 
the tube, distending its walls tem¬ 
porarily for purposes of the examina¬ 
tion. The tube and its light then are 
turned in different directions and a 



BLADDER DISEASES 


BLADDER DISEASES 


system of mirrors which are part of 
the cystoscope are so focused as to 
enable the physician to see the pres¬ 
ence of infection inside the organ. 
Sometimes inflammation is indicated 
by abnormal changes in the wall of 
the bladder and growth can usually 
be seen with this instrument. The 
cystoscope can be used to administer 
drup and for other treatment of in¬ 
fections of the bladder. 

New methods for combatting 
bladder infection represent a vast 
advance over what was formerly 
available. These include penicfllin 
and other antibiotic drugs, the sulfas, 
Mandelamine and Furadantin, and 
others. They are administered both 
by mouth and by injection, through 
which they reach the bladder by way 
of the blood stream. Some drugs are 
injected into the bladder itself, for 
direct application to an affected area. 

Cystitis in chronic form may result 
from an initial acute attack, but may 
be caused also by stones or tumors. 
Occasionally older men contract it 
as the result of retaining urine in the 
bladder for a long time, especially if 
the urine decomposes. 

The most critical infection that 
may affect the bladder is tuberculosis, 
which usually accompanies tubercu¬ 
losis of the kidney. Some of the new 
drugs have considerable effect on this 
disease. When tuberculosis affects 
only one kidney and the other is 
found with certainty to be soimd, the 
diseased kidney often is successfully 
removed. 

Stones in the bladder, formed 
either within the bladder itself or 
passed into it from the kidney, al¬ 


though not uncommon are not en¬ 
countered as often as in the past. 
Men are twenty times more suscepti¬ 
ble to stones in the kidney than 
women because men in general are 
much more prone to disorders of the 
bladder. In part, diflBculties which 
older men have with the prostate 
gland, an organ lacking in women, 
are responsible. The stones may be 
tiny or range in size to that of an egg, 
and symptoms encountered are 
similar to those of cystitis. 

The newer advances in medicine 
offer a variety of ways to care for 
stones in the bladder. Diagnosis is 
much quicker and more certain than 
was possible in the past. The cys¬ 
toscope, aided by x-ray, reveals 
stones unmistakably where formerly 
the doctor had little to guide him ex¬ 
cept the patient’s general symptoms 
or accidental occurrence of stones in 
the urine itself. 

Generally the x-ray is used to de¬ 
tect stones an 3 rwhere in the urinary 
tract. The patient is given a substance 
that is opaque to x-rays, and the 
subsequent photograph will disclose 
the exact location of the stone. The 
cystoscope is also used for this pur¬ 
pose and can even go beyond the 
bladder into the ureters. Other in¬ 
struments inserted into the bladder 
sometimes are used to crush stones 
which then can be removed in pieces 
through the tube. Occasionally surgi¬ 
cal removal of the stones may be 
necessary. In women, often a stone 
may be extracted by dilating the rela¬ 
tively short urethra. 

A variety of tumors may affect the 
bladder. Most common among these 





01.131 fcKS 


is the papilloma^ noncancerous, 
which especially seems to attack 
workers Ib aniline factories. Consider¬ 
able pain, often accompanied by 
blood in the urine, is manifested, and 
chronic cystitis may develop. Treat¬ 
ment is similar to that of cystitis, 
followed by removal of the tumor or 
treatment by radiation. Abnormal 
bladder growth may be removed with 
instruments inserted through a cysto- 
scope, thus eliminating surgery. The 
size of the tumor or nature of the 
repair needed for the wall of the 
bladder determines the specific pro¬ 
cedure. See also urethra; urination 

BLASTOMYCOSIS, or GHchrist’s 
disease, an infection caused by a 
yeastlike fungus. It is found chiefly 
in the central regions of North 
America, and is more common in 
men than in women. 

The infection, which usually starts 
on the exposed parts of the face, 
neck, or extremities, consists of large, 
purplish, thickly crusted ulcers. While 
the infection is confined to the skin, 
the general health of the patient re¬ 
mains good. Often, however, the 
lungs become infected, and the dis¬ 
ease then bears a striking resemblance 
to tuberculosis. The symptoms are 
fever, loss of weight, night sweats, 
and cough, and the sputum fre¬ 
quently is bloody. Correct diag¬ 
nosis is made by finding the fungi 
which cause the disease either in the 
sputum or in the discharge from the 
ulcerous material. 

Management of blastomycosis in¬ 
cludes the use of potassium iodides, 
the newer stilbine drugs, and x-ray. 


The South American variety of 
this condition is best treated with 
sulfonamides. 

BLEEDING. See hemorrhage; 

WOUNDS. 

BLEPHARITIS, a contagious inflam¬ 
mation of the edges of the eyelids 
that most often affects children, 
especially following an illness. Small 
infected blisters form at the roots of 
the lashes. These may lead to ulcers, 
then scars, which change the direc¬ 
tion of the lashes, turning some of 
them inward against the eyeball. 
Sometimes the entire edge of the 
lid is distorted inward or outward. If 
not eliminated, the condition will 
eventually make the affected area red, 
thickened, and covered with scales. 

Because faulty vision may prolong 
the disease, the eyes should be ex¬ 
amined promptly so that glasses can 
be prescribed if necessary. The gen¬ 
eral health and sanitary habits of the 
child should also receive careful 
attention, not only for his own wel¬ 
fare but also to protect the rest of 
the family from infection through 
use of the same towels or bedding. 

In severe cases, sulfa or penicillin 
drops may be prescribed by the 
physician. Boric acid compresses 
and drops may also be desirable. 
Recurrence frequently calls for re¬ 
peated and persistent treatment. 

BLISTERS, small bladder-like cavi- 
ties under the skin containing watery 
material. Blisters may be the result 
of an infection, such as eczema, 
herpes, impetigo, or chicken pox, or 
they may be caused by mjuries, such 



BLOATING 


BLOOD 


as pinching, chafing, burning, or 
scalding. Anyone who does much 
walking should make certain that his 
shoes are well fitted, large enough so 
that they do not pinch his feet but 
not so large that they produce irritat¬ 
ing friction between the leather and 
the flesh. A vigorous walker often 
hardens his feet before an excursion 
with some appropriate medication, 
such as a solution of alum. After a 
walk, the feet should be washed 
and rested. 

Painful blisters may also result 
from sunburn. To prevent this, 
yellow petroleum jelly, olive oil, or 
cold cream may be applied to the 
skin before going out into the sun 
for any length of time. A number of 
commercial preparations are avail¬ 
able which are designed to filter out 
some of the ultraviolet rays. If 
blisters occur as a result of exposure 
to the sun, they are treated as any 
other burn with soothing medications 
or creams. Severe sunburn can be 
dangerous as well as painful, and 
should be treated by a physician. 

Blisters are sometimes deliberately 
induced as a counterirritant in the 
treatment of such ailments as lum¬ 
bago, sciatica, and pleurisy. For this 
purpose, a mustard plaster is used. 

In time, most blisters dry up with¬ 
out special treatment. Those which 
burst should be washed with soap 
and water and covered with a sterile 
dressing. If a large blister is opened, 
this is done near the outer margin 
with a sterilized needle. After pressing 
gently to eject the fluid, a sterile 
dressing should be applied. See also 
burns; sunburn. 


BLOATING, a swelling or accumula¬ 
tion of fluid brought about by any 
cause. 

BLOOD, the opaque red fluid which 
flows through the blood vessels, is 
the transport medium of the body, 
bringing to all the tissues the food 
and oxygen they need for growth and 
repair. It distributes the secretions, 
or hormones, manufactiued by the 
important glands of the body, to 
the organs where they are needed to 
carry out their special functions. It 
removes the waste products from the 
tissues, transmits the carbon dioxide 
to the lungs where it is liberated and 
the remaining materials to the kidneys 
from which they are then eliminated 
from the body. Blood helps to main¬ 
tain the body at a uniform tempera¬ 
ture and keeps the other body fluids 
in a state of equilibrium. When the 
body is invaded by disease, the blood 
is the first line of defense against the 
infection by the action of its white 
cells and other substances, antibodies, 
which it transports to the involved 
site. Another of its functions is to 
prevent any increase in acidity or 
alkalinity within the body. 

The blood is made of a light, 
straw-colored fluid, or plasma, in 
which are suspended the red blood 
cells, or erythrocytes, the white blood 
cells, or leukoc 5 rtes, and the platelets, 
or thrombocytes. The red cells are 
biconcave, disclike bodies, so small 
that a drop of blood the size of a 
pinhead contains about 5 million 
cells. Formed in the red marrow of 
the blood, the average number of 
red cells in man is ahnnt ^ nnn Afin 



DtUOD 


v-»> 



Biooci — Model of a ho man figore showing the circyfatory system. The heart, arteries, veins 
and capillaries constitute the circulatory system. It is the function of this system to transport 
blood to all parts of the body. Circulation also plays an important role in regulating body 
temperature. 





BLOOD 


BLOOD 



Blood — The human circulatory system. The blood is kept flowing through the body by the 
action of the heart which alternately contracts and relaxes When the heart relaxes the blood 
comes in by way of the veins and is forced out into the arteries when the heart contracts. 
The blood circulates through the body and is returned to the heart by the veins again and 
the cycle repeats The heart is constantly at work circulating the blood by way of these main 
vessels and the smaller vessels which keep branching out to form a fine network throughout 
the body. 


per cubic millimeter; in women it is 
about 4,500,000. About 95 per cent 
of the red cells is a red iron-contain¬ 
ing pigment called hemoglobin which 
gives the cells and the blood a bright 
red color. The iron makes it possible 
for the hemoglobin to combine with 
oxygen in the lungs, which is then 
distributed in the body. When the 
hemoglobin picks up the oxygen, the 
color is a brighter red than when it 
returns to the heart after circulating 
through the body, having deposited 
its oxygen m the body tissues. The 
active existence of these red cells is 


normally about 120 days, and as 
they are broken down they are im¬ 
mediately replaced by new cells 
from the bone marrow. When the old 
red cells are destroyed they undergo 
a highly organized breakdown. The 
iron from the hemoglobin is stored 
in the liver, passed into the general 
circulation, and then used again in the 
production of more hemoglobin. The 
remaining substances are changed by 
the liver into bile pigment and most 
of this is excreted m the stools or 
urine. 

The white cells are complete or- 



gaflisms within themselves, each cell 
being a small mass of protoplasm 
containing a nucleus, while the red 
cells lose their nucleus before leaving 
the bone marrow. The white cells 
consist of several varieties of colorless 
cells, which are classified into two 
main groups: the granulocytes, which 
contain granules, and the agranu- 
locytes, which do not. The white 
cells have the specific function of 
fighting disease. Normally, in the 
adult, there are about 5,000 to 10,000 
white blood ceils per cubic millimeter 
of blood. In the infant this amount is 
almost doubled. The cells are usually 
almost spherical in shape, but they 



Blood — The hear! itself has a blood supply. 
To carry on their continuous activity the 
heart muscles need food and oxygen. Two 
coronary arteries supply the heart muscles 
with blood. The diagram shows the right 
and left coronary arteries os they branch out 
through the hearty carrying nourishment to 
all the tissues, if a clot (thrombus) plugs an 
artery a portion of the heart will not receive 
its blood supply and the tissues In that area 
will begin to die. This condition is known as 
a '^hearf attack/' or coronary thrombosis. 
The patient will survive such an attack if the 
second artery can take up the work of the 
affected artery while the wounded muscle 
heals and scar tissue forms. 


varj' in size, some being somewhat 
smaller than the red cells, others 
larger. They move about freely in 
the blood stream, rapidly when neces¬ 
sary. They decrease in number when 
the body is at rest, and increase dur¬ 
ing activity. When infection de¬ 
velops in the body, the white cells 
greatly multiply in number, and are 
immediately propelled to the affected 
tissues where they engulf and digest 
the bacteria or other foreign material. 
This process, phagocytosis, of de¬ 
vouring a smaller cell or germ is 
carried out by the white cells known 
as phagocytes. The term means to eat 
cells. In pneumonia, for example, as 
many as 60,000 white cells per cubic 
millimeter have been found in the 
blood. One of the first symptoms in 
appendicitis is the abnormal increase 
in the white cell count. This property 
serves as one of the most reliable in¬ 
dications of infection and helps to 
confirm diagnoses in infectious dis¬ 
eases. The formation of pus is due not 
only to diseased tissues and bacteria 
but also in large measure to the white 
cells which have been caught in the 
infected area. 

The blood platelets are colorless, 
disc-shaped or irregular bodies, much 
smaller than the red cells, averaging 
about 300,000 to the cubic millimeter 
of blood. They serve primarily to 
clot any minor tears in the small 
blood vessels or capillaries, clumping 
together at the site of injury and act¬ 
ing as a block until the tissue heals. 
Although plasma deprived of platelets 
will also clot, the platelets are gener¬ 
ally found at the site of the injury, 
where they release a substance called 



BLOOD BANK 


thromboplastin, which initiates the 
clotting process. 

Plasma, the fluid portion of the 
blood, is composed of approximately 
90 per cent water, 7 per cent of 
various proteins, and a fraction of 
various kinds of salts and other raw 
materials needed by the body. The 
proteins include albumin, globulin, 
fibrinogen, and prothrombin, and 
these, together with the salts in the 
plasma, are of the greatest signifi¬ 
cance in maintaining a normal water 
balance between the fluid in the 
tissues and the fluid in the blood. 
They have a strong attraction for 
water and are able to hold water 
molecules to replace the water lost 
to the tissue fluid. When the protein 
in the blood is decreased, the water 
balance is upset and more fluid 
escapes from the plasma to the 
tissues, causing swelling, or edema, 
as is sometimes seen in cases of 
kidney disease. The albumin is 
largely responsible for keeping the 
blood volume constant. The fibrino¬ 
gen is acted upon by another chemi¬ 
cal compound or enzyme called 
thrombin, and is converted into fi¬ 
brin, which is essential to blood clot- 
ting.This enzyme is derived from an¬ 
other protein in the blood plasma, 
the prothrombin. The various mineral 
salts carried in the plasma are also 
essential for the proper functioning 
of the organs. Even slight changes in 
the salt content of the blood may 
induce improper functioning of some 
of the tissues; those primarily af¬ 
fected are the nervous and the mus¬ 
cular tissues. 

Among the significant contribu- 



Blood Bank — Human blood must be ob- 

tained, processed, stored and adminisfered 
under germ-free conditions. Blood is shipped 
from blood centers in refrigerated boxes 
which maintain the blood at a proper tem¬ 
perature. 


tions made in the war on disease is 
the use of gamma globulin as an aid 
in the treatment of measles and other 
infectious diseases and the effective 
action of fibrin foam, a derivative of 
fibrinogen, as an aid in treating hem¬ 
orrhage. The use of blood plasma 
and blood transfusion to control 
shock, particularly on the battle fields 
during World War II, served to sus¬ 
tain life until adequate surgical treat¬ 
ment could be obtained, and was 
responsible for saving countless lives. 
See also blood types; hemophilia; 

LEUKEMIA . 

BLOOD BANK, exactly what its 
name implies: a depository for blood 
or blood derivatives. The first blood 
bank in the United States was es¬ 
tablished in Cook County Hospital, 
Chicago, in 1937. Blood storage 
has now become a significant adjunct 




I'reesins Wcisma — Plasma, the liquid part 
of blood, can be stored for approximately 
five years The pooled plasma is placed in 
a 80°F. bath and shelf frozen. Here, an ex¬ 
perienced employee is examining one of the 
bottles during the shell-freezing process. 
Work is carried on in air-conditioned rooms 
under aseptic conditions. 



DLUUU BANK 



Piasmo — In a sterile compartment, glass 
containers are filled v/ifh pooled, irradiated 
plasma Following labeling and packaging 
of the bottles, plasma is sent to regional 
blood centers for distribution to physicians 
and hospitals 


to most hospitals. Blood of the var¬ 
ious types, O, A, B, and AB, given 
by donors, is stored so that victims 
of accidents, patients after surgical 
operations, and sufferers from cer¬ 
tain diseases can be quickly supplied 
with new additions of blood. 

Blood plasma iqstead of liquid 
blood now also is widely stored. It 
keeps for long periods and does not 
require typing. By addition of water 
to the powder, plasma is promptly 
available. In a few diseases of the 
blood, however, plasma cannot be 
used. See also blood transfusion. 


Blood Donation — A Red Cross nurse care- 

fully keeps an eye on a donor as his pint of 
life-saving blood fills the precious bottle. 
Before blood can be donated all donors 
must be examined for presence of infec¬ 
tions and checked for past illnesses such os 
malorta or jaundice. 




BLOOD POISONING 


BLOOD PRESSURE, CONTROL OF 


BLOOD POISONING. See bac¬ 
teremia. 

BLOOD PRESSURE, measured in 
two levels, is the degree of pressure 
exerted by the heart and arteries to 
keep the blood circulating in the 
blood vessels throughout the body. 
The maximum level, the systolic 
pressure, records the force exerted 
in the arteries with each heartbeat 
or contraction to propel the blood out 
of the left ventricle of the heart 
into the aorta, the large artery. The 
minimum level, the diastolic pressure, 
records the relaxed phase of the heart, 
between beats. This pressure in¬ 
dicates to the doctor the condition of 
the small blood vessels or arterioles 
—that is, their ability to contract and 
keep the flow of blood constant 
throughout the body. This pressure 
is maintained at a constant level, since 
each heartbeat forces into the large 
artery an amount of blood equal to 
that which escapes more gradually 
from the arterioles into the capil¬ 
laries. 

The systolic and diastolic pressures 
are recorded by means of a sphygmo¬ 
manometer, a word from the Greek, 
meaning measurement of pulses. The 
instrument consists of a broad rubber 
cuff covered by a long cloth sleeve 
and two rubber tubes leading out 
from the cuff through the cloth. One 
of the tubes is connected to a small 
rubber bulb which inflates the cuff 
and has a control for the inflow and 
escape of air; the second tube is at¬ 
tached to the pressure gauge, which 
contains a column of mercury and is 
graduated from 0 to 300 millimeters. 


To record blood pressure, the rub¬ 
ber cuff with its cloth cover is 
wrapped around the upper arm. 
Usually the brachial artery of the left 
arm is used to measure pressure. The 
examiner places his stethoscope on 
the artery, at the bend of the elbow, 
and inflates the cuff by squeezing the 
bulb. This produces pressure on the 
artery, which causes the mercury to 
rise in the sphygmomanometer, and 
the sound of the pulse can be heard 
through the stethoscope. The ex¬ 
aminer continues to inflate the cuff 
imtil the sound can no longer be 
heard. Then he gradually releases the 
pressure on the bulb until the sound 
is heard again. At this point the height 
of the column of mercury in the 
sphygmomanometer indicates the 
systolic pressure. The examiner then 
permits the bag to deflate gradually 
until the sound suddenly becomes 
faint or cannot be heard at all. The 
height of the column of mercury at 
this point records the diastolic pres¬ 
sure. See also blood pressure, high; 
BLOOD PRESSURE, LOW; BLOOD PRES¬ 
SURE, normal; circulatory sys¬ 
tem; HEART. 

BLOOD PRESSURE, CONTROL 
OF. Changing demands of the body 
cause blood pressure to vary. In run¬ 
ning, one needs more blood in his 
muscles, heart and brain. Some of 
this extra blood is borrowed by de¬ 
creasing the amount in the kidneys, 
intestines, and liver. Also, this blood 
is needed at a fairly high pressure to 
maintain a rapid flow of oxygen to 
the exercising muscles. All this is ac¬ 
complished first by the brain and 



ULUUU rKtssuKc, ni<t7n 


DLiuuiJ rptcasuKK, HIGH 


nervous system. Impulses are sent 
out which accelerate the heart, con¬ 
strict vessels in the kidney and in¬ 
testines, open channels into the 
muscles, and in general activate cir¬ 
culation from its resting level. This 
activation is sometimes reinforced 
by stimulation of the adrenal glands 
which liberate epinephrine (adren¬ 
alin) and nor-epinephrine (nor- 
adrenalin). These secretions rein¬ 
force nerve stimulation by a chemi¬ 
cal action. 

In theory, this chain would be 
endless; in practice, it is not. The 
end is determined in part by needs 
of the body for blood and capacity 
of the heart to pump it. Pressure is 
set at a proper level by pressure- 
sensitive nerve endings (pressure 
stats) which lie in the vessels them¬ 
selves, particularly in those leading 
to the brain. These relay to the nerv¬ 
ous system information enabling it 
to regulate its level of discharge and 
maintain proper pressure. Action of 
these nerves is similar to that of a 
governor of an’engine which keeps 
the engine from destroying itself by 
running at too great a speed. 

Thus, the primary devices of 
blood pressure control are nerves. 
Their role explains why unpleasant 
combative states of mind so often 
are associated with upward swings 
of pressure since they bring the cir¬ 
culation into an attitude of defense. 
Behind these nerve mechanisms are 
even more basic systems of blood 
pressure regulation which depend 
on the presence of chemical sub¬ 
stances in the blood. These chemi¬ 


cals act on the blood vessels and 
heart either directly or by altering 
their ability to respond to the nerv¬ 
ous system indirectly. Thus, the kid¬ 
neys can secrete a substance called 
renin which in the blood causes 
liberation of angiotonin, a substance 
which stimulates arterioles to con¬ 
strict. Thyroid hormone and hor¬ 
mones of the adrenal cortex also are 
necessary for normal action of ves¬ 
sels so that glands which produce 
these chemicals are indirect regula¬ 
tors of blood pressure. See also 
BLOOD pressure; Bl.OOD PRESSURE, 
high; blood pressure, low; blood 

PRESSURE, NORMAL. 

BLOOD PRESSURE, HIGH (hyper¬ 
tension), the state of blood pres¬ 
sure beyond the normal limits. 
One cause of hypertension is the nar¬ 
rowing, or constriction, of the 
smallest branches of the arteries 
throughout the body. This tends to 
slow the flow of blood through the 
tiny vessels, and causes the heart to 
pump harder in order to keep the 
blood circulating throughout the 
body. The increased resistance in the 
arterioles is indicated on the device 
for measuring blood pressure by a 
rise in the diastolic pressure; and the 
increased pumping force of the left 
ventricle of the heart is indicated by 
a rise in systolic pressure. Hyperten¬ 
sive disease affects about 5 per cent 
of the adult population. 

A simple elevation of blood pres¬ 
sure may be due to a variety of 
causes, all of which increase the 
systolic pressure and are classified 
as systolic hypertension. Persons who 



BLOOD PRESSURE, HIGH 


BLOOD PRESSURE, HIGH 


are excitable may show a rise up to 
50 millimeters above normal level 
when the blood pressure is taken, and 
this may indicate only a reaction of 
extreme anxiety. In such cases, a few 
hours of quiet rest will bring the 
blood pressure down to normal. In 
older people whose arteries have lost 
their elastic quality, the heart must 
pump more forcibly, with a resulting 
rise in the systolic pressure, but with¬ 
out appreciable change in the dias¬ 
tolic pressure. A high systolic pres¬ 
sure is frequently the result of 
decreased elasticity of the arteries, as 
in some types of rheumatic heart dis¬ 
ease, which causes heart block; in 
hyperthyroidism, which causes the 
thyroid gland to function excessively; 
and in arteriovenous aneurysms. 
These conditions are not considered 
true hypertension, but are significant 
as indications of an underlying dis¬ 
ease. 

True hypertension, or diastolic 
hypertension, due to a narrowing of 
the arterioles, is rare in persons under 
thirty-five years of age, and then 
usually is a hereditary manifestation. 
As a rule hypertension is found in 
persons past forty, though many per¬ 
sons who first discover a mild hyper¬ 
tension at forty to fifty years of age 
may have had an elevated blood pres¬ 
sure for many years previously. The 
disease is more prevalent in persons 
between sixty and seventy years of 
age, and occurs more often in women, 
but more seriously in men. Usually 
these cases follow a mild uneventful 
pattern. Hypertension also is found 
more frequently in patients with 
diabetes mellitus. 


Since hypertension is prevalent 
among the people of Europe and 
North America, it has been called a 
disease of civilized life. Inhabitants 
of tropical and subtropical countries 
and of the Orient rarely develop this 
condition. Whether or not the varia¬ 
tion is due to the difference in climate 
or diet or to less strenuous living 
conditions in those countries is not 
known. When nonoccidentals move 
to western countries they too develop 
hypertension. 

Although the body build does not 
seem to be significant in hypertension, 
obesity does constitute a serious fac¬ 
tor. Overweight increases the amount 
of work the heart must perform, and 
a loss of weight is often accompanied 
by a fall in blood pressure. The per¬ 
son with high blood pressure is fre¬ 
quently a high-strung person who re¬ 
acts tensely to the everyday problems 
of living, and is apt to suppress hos¬ 
tilities, aggressions, and fears. These 
inner conflicts establish a nervous 
reaction which may become localized 
in the tiny blood vessels and eventu¬ 
ally cause high blood pressure, just 
as tensions in some persons may 
cause ulcers of the stomach. Al¬ 
though hypertension is not a heredi¬ 
tary disease, the tendency or pre¬ 
disposition to the disease is stronger 
in some families than in others and, 
not infrequently, the condition will 
be found in more than one member 
of a family. 

In true diastolic hypertension, the 
cause is definitely known in only a 
small percentage of cases and in these 
is generally attributed to kidney dis¬ 
ease. Acute glomerulonephritis, a kid- 





BLOOD PRESSURE, HIGH 


BLOOD PRESSURE, HIGH 


ney disorder often seen in children 
and young people following a strep¬ 
tococcal infection, results in high 
blood pressure. Most of those affected 
recover completely. The toxemia of 
pregnancy, which usually occurs af¬ 
ter the sixth month, involves the kid¬ 
neys and is associated with high 
blood pressure. 

Chronic pyelonephritis and con¬ 
genital polycystic kidneys have also 
been found in association with hyper¬ 
tension. In all cases in which kidney 
disease is suspected as an underlying 
cause, the urine is examined for ab¬ 
normalities at regular intervals. When 
infection or degeneration of a kidney 
causes hypertension, particularly in 
persons under fifty years of age, the 
removal of the kidney by operation 
sometimes results in lowering the 
blood pressure to normal. 

Hypertension may also be caused 
by tumors of the endocrine glands, 
or by certain nerve cells. The adrenal 
glands, which are a part of the en¬ 
docrine apparatus, are located over 
each kidney and secrete the hormone 
adrenalin into the blood stream. Ad¬ 
renalin raises the blood pressure and 
when a tumor develops in the adrenal 
area an excessive amoimt of adrenalin 
is secreted. Surgical removal of the 
tumor lowers the blood pressure to 
normal. A tumor of the pituitary 
gland, another endocrine gland, 
located just below the brain, may also 
induce hypertension. Occasionally 


tumors arising in certain nerve cells 
of the sympathetic nervous system 
will produce a sustained type of hy¬ 
pertension. Surgical removal of the 
tumors reduces hypertension. The in¬ 
creased occurrence of hypertension 
during the menopause in women and 
the climactenc in men is also at¬ 
tributed to endocrine causes, al¬ 
though the mechanism involved is 
not clearly understood. 

Another form of true hyper¬ 
tension, a narrowing or stricture of 
the aorta, foimd in children and 
yoimg people is coarctation of the 
aorta. Some children are bom with 
the disorder, which results in a high 
blood pressure in the arms and a low 
pressure in the legs. This condition 
is cured by surgery. 

The specific causes of high blood 
pressure are knovm in only about 
20 per cent of all cases involving 
hypertensive disease. In these cases, 
high blood pressure is called “essen¬ 
tial hypertension,” which also has the 
characteristic narrowing of the 
arterioles throughout the body with 
the consequent resistance in these 
tiny vessels to the flow of blood, and 
the rise of blood pressure necessary 
to keep the blood circulating in the 
body. The course of essential hyper¬ 
tension and the complications that 
accompany it are practically identical 
with that of diastolic hypertensions 
due to known causes. When the ail¬ 
ment progresses slowly over many 


Blood Vessel — New and improved surgical techniques are in use to repair and replace 

damaged blood vessels. A defective portion of the aorta of the abdomen is shown (top) in 
which a blood clot has cut off the flow of blood. The defective segment of the aorta is 
removed (center) and a new piece of healthy aorta is inserted and sutured to replace the 
diseased seqment (hoffom). 



mcaawRC, ni«»n 


o«.»-9vu ri^caJUKC, mUH 


years, it is noted as benign, or mild. 

Benign hypertension may exist for 
many years without any evidence to 
suggest its presence other than a 
moderate elevation of blood pressure. 
A person past forty may see a doctor 
because of headache, doziness, fail¬ 
ing vision, or noises in the head, ex¬ 
pecting to be told that the discomfort 
is due to high blood pressure. Actu¬ 
ally the elevation of blood pressure 
may not be great, and it may vary 
from one visit to the next; such 
changes are of little significance. In 
many instances, persons with high 
blood pressure remain well for years 
without showing any apparent change 
in health. The complaints are not due 
to the hypertension, but rather to 
some of the complications associated 
with hypertension. 

Once the presence of the disease is 
definitely established, a thorough, in¬ 
clusive examination is essential to 
evaluate the complications and deter¬ 
mine the progress and severity of the 
hypertensive condition. These com¬ 
plications may not appear for years, 
but when they do the organs most 
frequently affected are the heart, 
eyes, brain, and kidneys. The ex¬ 
amination, therefore, is directed to¬ 
ward a search for signs that indicate 
an insufficient flow of blood to any 
of these organs, or that suggest the 
possibility of disease of any of these 
organs. 

When the arteries which feed the 
heart, the coronary arteries, become 
narrowed, a person may experience 
a temporary pain, angina pectoris, on 
exertion. Or he may be subjected 


to a more serious attack, coronary 
thrombosis, which is accompanied by 
shortness of breath, particularly at 
night, and other manifestations of 
shock. Hypertension may also cause 
an enlargement of the heart which 
results from the exertion of the heart 
muscles pumping against the resist¬ 
ance of the arterioles. Eventually this 
disorder will also cause heart pain 
and shortness of breath. 

When the arteries in the brain be¬ 
come hardened, personality changes 
appear, with emotional instability, 
failure to concentrate, and forgetful¬ 
ness, especially of recent events. This 
is particularly true of older people 
who have developed cerebral arte¬ 
riosclerosis. Temporary weakness, un¬ 
steadiness in walking, and noises in 
the ears are symptoms which may 
precede a cerebral hemorrhage or 
clot in one of the arteries, which 
causes a stroke or apoplexy. The less 
serious cases of stroke cause paraly¬ 
sis of one side of the body with, 
occasionally, an interference in 
speech. The paralysis usually disap¬ 
pears entirely or partially within a 
period of months. 

In benign, essential hypertension, 
the function of the kidney is generally 
never seriously impaired unless the 
condition is associated with an un¬ 
derlying kidney disease. 

Examination of the blood vessels 
in the retina of the eye often helps 
the doctor to determine the condi¬ 
tion of the blood vessels in cases of 
hypertension. The eye is the one 
place in the body where the arterioles 
can be seen directly with an oph- 


1 0/1 



BLOOD PRESSURE, HIGH 


BLOOD PRESSURE, HIGH 


thalmoscope, a mirrored instrument 
used to examine eyes. These arteries 
show varying degrees of spasms or 
narrowing in the early stages of hy¬ 
pertension, and often indicate the 
presence of arteriosclerosis. The ret¬ 
inal arterioles also indicate a gen¬ 
eralized arteriolar disease, but do not 
indicate the specific degree of in¬ 
volvement of any particular vessel. 

High blood pressure is frequently 
accompanied by hardening, sclerosis, 
of the arteries throughout the body. 
This process is called arteriosclerosis, 
one of the commonest disorders of 
advanced age. Usually the first in¬ 
dication of its presence is a clotting 
of a larger artery, or thrombotic 
occlusion. This may develop into 
cerebral thrombosis, angina pectoris, 
or coronary thrombosis. 

In this country, about 15 to 20 per 
cent of deaths in people over fifty is 
caused by the immediate or remote 
consequences of hypertension. This 
has tended to obscure the fact that, 
of itself, hypertension is a relatively 
harmless disorder, which may not 
provoke symptoms or disability for 
many years. People with hypertension 
can, if no unforeseen complications 
develop, live out their lives normally. 
Extensive studies have shown that 
such persons have survived as long 
as forty years after a diagnosis of 
hypertension was made. The outlook 
is somewhat less favorable in men 
than in women, and in patients who 
have an existing kidney disorder. 

In the course of treating a hyper¬ 
tensive person, the doctor is mindful 
of symptoms or complications in¬ 


volving other organs. He observes 
any changes in his patient due to high 
pressure. A rise or fall in blood pres¬ 
sure is not as significant as examina¬ 
tion of the eyes, size of heart, elec¬ 
trocardiograms, degree of kidney 
function, and other physical measure¬ 
ments which give the doctor informa¬ 
tion. 

In cases of hypertension, both 
physical and psychological factors are 
significant. Most doctors feel that an 
overconsciousness of blood pressure 
makes some people lead lives of ex¬ 
cessive concern and even semi¬ 
invalidism. While the prevention of 
anxiety may not alter the course of 
the hypertension itself, it makes a 
great difference in the person’s at¬ 
titude and outlook on life. Too often 
people have been invalided merely 
from overawareness of their high 
blood pressure rather than from the 
physic^ effects of the hypertension. 
Hence, the re-education of those 
people with high blood pressxire is es¬ 
sential so that they may carry on 
normal lives. They should learn to 
discuss themselves and their prob¬ 
lems objectively, as individuals rather 
than as medical cases. This will not 
only permit a greater insight into the 
situation but will often result in re¬ 
lief from anxiety. 

The general fear of hypertension 
is one of the great obstacles to mini¬ 
mizing an anxiety reaction. Yet this 
can be overcome when one knows 
how blood pressure normally varies, 
not only from time to time but from 
person to person, with every exertion 

7?7 



30D PRESSURE, HIGH 


BLOOD PRESSURE, HIGH 


emotional experience. That the 
inition of normal blood pressure 
. been broadened is significant and 
;ouraging. 

Vlany persons with milder degrees 
hypertension need not even be 
)jected to dietary restriction unless 
!y are obese. They can follow the 
ivity pattern of normal living, 
aiding only overwork, overexertion, 
d excesses. 

Overweight in people with hyper- 
ision is a liability and the frequency 
incidence of il l ness and death is 
rectly proportional to the amount 
extra weight. A suitable low-calorie 
et, usually high in proteins and low 
fats, starches, and carbohydrates, 
lould be selected and continually 
ipervised by a doctor. 

The use of a low-salt diet for hy- 
ertension has been effective in re- 
ucing the blood pressure in many 
ases, often bringing it to normal 
jvels. Since most natural foods, such 
s milk and meats, and many pre- 
ared foods, such as bread, contain 
considerable amount of salt, ad- 
lerence to this type of diet was 
liflScult until recently when many 
alt-free foods became available. In 
ddition, planning a low-salt diet has 
•een simplified by publications which 
re available to the public. A pam- 
>hlet, “Food for your Heart,” pub- 
ished by the American Heart As- 
ociation may be obtained from them 
;or a few cents. Low-salt diets should 
)e undertaken only on the advice 
md under the supervision of a doctor 
iince some salt in the diet, particu- 
arly during hot weather, is required 
■n nrpvpfit sodium denletion, the so- 


A surgical operation on the sym¬ 
pathetic nervous system has been 
devised for treating hypertension. 
The nerves in this system, in a chain 
on either side of the spine, carry the 
impulses from the brain which cause 
the tiny arterioles to become narrow. 
When these nerves are cut, the nar¬ 
rowing process is halted and blood 
pressure drops. Sympathectomy has 
been in use for fifteen years. Some 
persons improve dramatically after 
the operation, but many are not 
helped at aU, and to know before¬ 
hand just which patients will benefit 
is difficult. It is a major operation 
and is done in only a few medical 
centers throughout the country. An¬ 
other major operative procedure now 
being tried is radical bilateral adren¬ 
alectomy, which involves removal 
of the adrenal glands. These glands 
are useful in the general metabolic 
action of the body, and it is still too 
soon to know whether or not the 
operation is effective in reducing 
symptoms of hypertension, and to 
know what are the aftereffects of 
removal of the glands. 

New drugs for the treatment of 
hypertension are designed to paralyze 
the sympathetic nerves in an effort 
to accomplish what surgical pro¬ 
cedure does in cutting these nerves. 
Development of new drugs is making 
operation much less frequent. Among 
the most frequently used drugs are 
Apresoline, Hexamethonium and Hy- 
dergine. In some cases, these remedies 
are prescribed in combination. All 
are extremely potent and should only 
be taken under the direct supervision 
of a doctor. Two other drugs, taken 



BLOOD PRESSURE, LOW 

rauwoifia serpentina, which slows the 
pulse rate and seems to relieve 
anxiety and temporary elevations in 
blood pressure, and veratrum viride, 
which tends to dilate the blood ves¬ 
sels and slow the pulse rate. In addi¬ 
tion to these potent medications, 
a new drug widely used is chlo¬ 
rothiazide called Diuril. Among the 
milder sedatives which prove helpful 
during periods of emotional stress are 
phenobarbital, chloral, and the 
bromides (not containing sodium). 
See also barbiturates . 

BLOOD PRESSURE, LOW (hypo¬ 
tension) . Approximately 25 to 30 per 
cent of the population has primary 
hypotension, arbitrarily described 
as pressures falling below 110 mil¬ 
limeters of mercury for the systolic 
level, and below 70 millimeters for 
the diastolic. 

When a known cause cannot be 
found for the low pressure, it is 
called primary, or essential, h 5 ?po- 
tension. Many normal men and 
women have blood pressure in this 
range. Symptoms cannot be attributed 
to this type of low blood pressure, 
and actually it is compatible with a 
greater than average life expectancy. 

Hypotension which sometimes 
develops in the course of a serious 
disease is known as secondary hypo¬ 
tension. Among such diseases are 
acute infections, heart failure, Ad¬ 
dison’s disease, malnutrition, Sim- 
monds’ disease, circulatory shock 
from hemorrhage, trauma, hyperin- 
sulinism, or other causes. Persons 
with secondary hypotension are weak, 
tired, and occasionally complain of 
ninA fotnfnpQQ Tti erenera,!. 


tSLUUU 

despite the drop in blood pressure 
in these cases, the body manages to 
maintain a sufficient blood supply for 
its needs. As recovery from the 
original cause progresses, the blood 
pressure becomes normal. 

Another type of low blood pres¬ 
sure, postural hypotension, as the 
name implies, is associated with 
change of position. Usually, when 
a person stands up, the blood pres¬ 
sure rises, in response to the energy 
exerted for this motion. In some 
cases, however, the blood pressure 
drops and causes faintness. Many 
normal people feel a slight dizziness 
when they change position suddenly, 
because the flow of blood to the brain 
is thus suddenly slowed and the brain 
tissue is sensitive to a lack of blood 
and oxygen. However, in postural 
hypotension the change in position 
provokes blurred vision, weakness, 
and fainting, and on lying down con¬ 
sciousness returns. Such persons 
should get up gradually from a re¬ 
cumbent position, wear an abdominal 
binder or special elastic stockings, or 
use blood-pressure stimulating drugs 
as prescribed by the doctor. 

BLOOD PRESSURE, NORMAL. 

People vary in their response to ex¬ 
ternal stimuli such as heat or cold, 
and also in their blood pressures. 
Transient deviations from the normal 
in any person are caused by such 
everyday activities as digestion, 
change of posture, exercise, and emo¬ 
tional stimulation. The degree to 
which the pressure is raised depends 
on the intensity of the stimulus and 
the individual response. 

At birth the blood pressure is about 



OOD TRANSFUSION 


BLOOD IKANSMJblON 


millimeters systolic aad 40 dias- 
iic, or, as it is usually writtea, 
t/40. This rises gradually and at 
lolescence is about 100/60, and be- 
/een the ages of twenty and forty it 

120/80. The rise continues slowly 
id at the age of sixty is around 
15/90. After that the diastolic pres- 
ire remains fairly stationary, al- 
lough the systolic may become 
imewhat higher. However, these 
gures represent the average, and a 
ifference of 10 per cent or more in 
ither direction is still within normal 
mits. 

In the past, people over forty were 
elieved to have limits of normal 
lood pressure around 150 systolic 
nd 90 diastolic, regardless of age 
•r sex, and many people with sup- 
losedly high blood pressure re- 
nained in good health. In 1952, Dr. 
^hur M. Master and his associates 
indertook a study of the blood pres- 
lUre of more than 50,000 men and 
vomen of varying ages. It was found 
hat the limits of normal blood pres¬ 
sure are much greater than the 
figures previously accepted, and that 
they vary with age and sex. It was 
also observed that blood pressure 
gradually increases with age; at sixty- 
five most normal men may have a sys¬ 
tolic pressure up to 170; and normal 
women, up to 175. The diastolic pres¬ 
sure may range between 100 and 110. 
In some cases a systolic pressure as 
high as 180 and a diastolic pressure 
of 110 seemed to be normal. Another 
significant observation was that with 
an increase in weight there was a 
progressive increase in blood pres¬ 
sure, regardless of age or sex. 


Wide variations exist in the so- 
called normal blood pressures at 
different ages. Blood pressure which 
falls in the outermost limits of nor¬ 
mal does not in itself constitute a dis¬ 
ease. Many factors combine to keep 
the blood pressure within normal 
limits—for instance, the exertion of 
the heart muscles as they pump the 
blood through the body, the degree 
of elasticity of the arterial walls as 
the blood flows through them, and 
the resistance encountered by the 
blood in the smaller blood vessels. 
Since all these may influence blood 
pressure, they must be carefully con¬ 
sidered before an elevation of blood 
pressure is considered significant. 

BLOOD TRANSFUSION, the trans¬ 
fer of blood from a donor to a re¬ 
cipient; one of the most widely used 
procedures in medical treatment. 
When severe hemorrhage has resulted 
in a great loss of blood, a transfusion 
will restore the circulating blood 
volume and the red blood cells 
which provide oxygen and food to the 
body tissues. Blood transfusion is an 
invaluable supporting treatment for 
surgical shock, to replace an excessive 
loss of blood at childbirth, or in such 
conditions as leukemia. In some cases, 
even when the circulating blood 
volume is normal, transfusion is used 
to replace a deficiency in one of the 
constituents of the blood, thus pro¬ 
viding red cells in cases of acute 
anemia, or in hemophilia, which is 
due to the lack of a specific clot- 
promoting factor in the blood plasma. 

The first recorded transfusion is 
believed to have been performed be- 



BLOOD ifCAW^ry^iijw 




tween two dogs by Richard Lower 
in England in 1665, and soon after it 
was tried in France. However, the 
results in human beings were so disas¬ 
trous that a law was passed in France 
forbidding transfusions. Not until the 
tarn of this century, when Karl 
Landsteiner began his study of the 
blood groupings, was progress made 
in this field. For many years, only 
direct transfusions were given, be¬ 
cause no means of keeping fresh 
blood from clotting were known. 
However, in 1914, Luis Agote of 
Argentina found that sodium citrate 
served this purpose, and by this 
discovery an incalculable number of 
lives were saved during the First 
World War. Richard Lewisohn of 
New York’s Mt. Sinai Hospital 
developed practically the citrate 
method. 

Since that time methods have been 
perfected for obtaining and storing 
human blood for future use. Blood 





banks for emergency use have be¬ 
come a part of many hospitals. 

All blood which is to be used for 
transfusions is obtained under the 
most exacting sanitary conditions, 
completely free from germs or other 



BSood Vessel Grafts — Grafts must be re¬ 
moved in as sterile a manner as possible. 
All the instruments used in handling the 
graft are sterilized and kept ready in a 
portable kit which may be rushed off to the 
hospital where the donor is available. Nurse 
is shown packing instruments and equip¬ 
ment [ust prior to obtaining the graft. 


Blood! Vessel Graffs — Advancements in 
surgery on the heart and blood vessels have 
created the need for banks for blood vessels. 
Photograph shows a fresh section of healthy 
blood vessel, obtained from a deceased 
donor, being dropped into special solution 
for storage and future use. Grafts must be 
obtained under surgical asepsis similar to 
that used by operating room staffs in any 
surgical procedure. 



LOOD TYPES 


i 1 a 



\ 

Blood Ironsfosion — Human blood con¬ 
tains red blood cells, white blood cells, 
platelets, and blood plasma. The cells may 
be separated from the plasma and the 
plasma frozen and stored for future use. 
Here is a hospitol technician preparing 
plasma for transfusion. 

coataminating influences. Blood do¬ 
nors are meticulously screened to rule 
out infectious diseases, and given 
tests for the presence of syphilis be¬ 
fore their blood is used. See also 
BLOOD bank; blood types; hem¬ 
orrhage; LEUKEMIA . 

BLOOD TYPES. The existence of 
human blood types was established 
by Karl Landsteiner in 1902 when 
he began a study to determine why 
fatalities occurred following some 
blood transfusions. He discovered 
that the cause was an incompatibility 
between the blood of the donor and 
that of the recipient. From this ob¬ 
servation came the Landsteiner clas¬ 
sification, the ABO blood groups. 


which classifies blood into four types, 
A, B, AB, and O, and the recognition 
of which blood groups can be safely 
mixed. 

Type O blood can give to aU blood 
types, but can receive only from 
type O. AB blood type can give to 
only AB, but can receive from any 
group. Thus type O is sometimes 
called the universal donor and type 
AB the universal recipient. Type A 
can give to types A and AB and re¬ 
ceive only from types A and O, and 
type B can give to types B and AB, 
and receive only from type B or O. 
The ideal blood transfusion utilizes 
the same type of donor and recipient 
blood. In this country, 85 per cent 
of the population belongs to groups 
A or O, and type AB is rare. The 
distribution of blood types varies con¬ 
siderably with geographical popula¬ 
tion. Blood types are inherited. 

As a safety measure, before a 
patient receives a whole-blood trans¬ 
fusion, the compatibility of his blood 
with the donor blood is checked by 
a cross-match test. Small samples of 
red blood cells and sera of the two 
bloods are combined and examined 
under a microscope for signs of in¬ 
compatibility or clumping. 

If incompatible bloods are mixed, 
the red cells of the donor blood are 
rapidly destroyed, liberating free 
hemoglobin into the patient’s circu¬ 
lating blood. The free hemoglobin 
breafe down and may be excreted 
through the kidneys; if the urine is 
acid the newly formed pigment which 
has resulted from the destruction of 
hemoglobin cannot be absorbed by 
the kidneys and is deposited in the 




BLUE BABY 


BLUE BABY 


tubular cells of that organ. T his 
causes kidney failure, with eventual 
death. The practice of cross-matching 
bloods before transfusions has virtu¬ 
ally eliminated deaths from transfu¬ 
sion. 

Highly significant in transfusions 
and obstetrics are Rh blood groups, 
which were first recognized in 1940 
by Landsteiner and A. S. Weiner. 
The Rh factor, a substance present 
in red blood cells, was uncovered 
during experiments with rhesus 
monkeys; thus the name Rh for 
rhesus. Subsequently this factor was 
related to unexplained accidents in 
transfusion, including hemolytic dis¬ 
ease of newborn infants, character¬ 
ized by disintegration of red blood 
cells. Eighty-five per cent of white 
persons have Rh positive factor, in¬ 
dicating that the red cells are ag¬ 
glutinated by antirhesus serum; the 
other 15 per cent are Rh negative, 
since their cells are not agglutinated 
by antirhesus serum. 

When an Rh negative person re¬ 
ceives Rh positive blood, he will de¬ 
velop particular antibodies. If the 
Rh negative person later again re¬ 
ceives Rh positive blood, a hemolytic 
anemia may result. This anemia ap¬ 
pears in newborn infants most fre¬ 
quently when the mother is Rh nega¬ 
tive and the father is Rh positive. 
It will occur only when the mother 
has had previous direct contact with 
Rh positive blood, such as in trans¬ 
fusion or by bearing an Rh positive 
child. Treatment involves giving the 
infant transfusions of Rh negative 
blood, and in severe cases the infant’s 
blood is almost totally replaced by 


Rh negative blood of the correct 
type. Blood banks keep on hand large 
supplies of Rh negative blood. 

Laboratory tests can reveal this 
sensitization, and the physician can 
then take measures to avoid or 
diminish accident to mother and 
child. A mother-to-be whose tests 
show she might give birth to an Rh 
positive child must receive careful 
medical attention. Only one in 40 or 
50 cases of mating between an Rh 
negative woman and an Rh positive 
man results in hemolytic anemia. See 
also anemia; cross-matching of 

BLOOD. 

BLUE BABY, a baby born with a 
congenital structural defect of the 
heart, which results in constant re¬ 
circulation of some of the dark or 
venous blood without its prior pas¬ 
sage through the lungs to pick up 
oxygen, thus giving the skin, lips, 
and nails a bluish look. Since 1945, 
many such infants have been saved 
by an operation developed by Drs. 
Alfred Blalock and Helen Taussig 
at Johns Hopkin University. Before 
that time, little could be done for the 
condition except to keep the child at 
rest and free of infection. Life ex¬ 
pectancy was low. 

Such defects occur frequently 
when the prenatal opening between 
the two pumping vessels of the baby’s 
heart, the ventricles, which normally 
closes at birth, fails to close. In addi¬ 
tion, distortion of the major artery 
leading away from the heart, and of 
the artery leading from the heart to 
the lungs, throws an abnormal load 
on one of the ventricles. Blood which 



BOECK'S SARCOID 


BONES 


plenty of soap. Special soaps are 
available but they do not appear to 
be any more effective than ordinary 
soap. Deodorants and antiperspirants 
may be used on parts of the body 
where perspiration is likely to be ex¬ 
cessive. Checking perspiration under 
the arms or other parts of the body is 
not harmful. After the lotion has 
been applied^ an antiseptic dusting 
powder may be used on the skin. 

For excessive perspiration of the 
feet, the doctor may prescribe a 
regular bath with a 1 per cent solu¬ 
tion of liquor formaldehyde. This is 
an exceedingly active chemical sub¬ 
stance and should not be used except 
on the advice of a physician. When 
it is applied to the skin, persons 
sensitive to it may have eruptions. 

Chlorophyll preparations adver¬ 
tised as controlling body odors have 
proved disappointing. Combined with 
other substances, they simply mask 
odors. 

Extra excretion of sweat may be 
associated with nervousness. Proper 
treatment will help control abnormal 
perspiration. In some instances, the 
application of x-ray by competent 
specialists has been found useful. 

BOECK’S SARCOID, a chronic dis¬ 
ease characterized by benign tumors 
resembling flesh. It is usually an ail¬ 
ment of young adults, but sometimes 
of older pedple. Skin, eyes, lungs, 
and bones of the feet and hands are 
especially affected. The cause of 
Boeck’s sarcoid, named after a nine¬ 
teenth-century Norwegian physician, 
is unknown, and a specific treatment 
has not as yet been found. Cortisone 


has been used with great success in 
treating the condition, but relapses 
are frequent. 

BOILS. See furuncles. 

BONE BANK. Until 1946, when 
bones were needed in orthopedic sur¬ 
gery, they were usually taken from 
the patient’s own body. In many cases 
this procedure resulted in weakened 
limbs, subject to easy fracture. Fol¬ 
lowing an idea of Dr. Philip D. Wil¬ 
son of New York City’s Hospital for 
Special Surgery, bone banks have 
been established at many hospitals. 
Small chips for filling cavities, and 
larger bones are preserved in deep 
freeze, to be grafted, after thawing, 
in the operating room. They are 
taken originally from amputated 
limbs, from deceased people, or 
from those undergoing orthopedic 
surgery. The thawed bone which is 
grafted does not itself grow, but 
stimulates growth of the healthy bone 
to which it is united. 

BONES, the solid elements of the 
body. Without a bony skeleton, the 
human being would collapse into a 
heap of tissues and organs, be com¬ 
pletely unable to move and extremely 
vulnerable to injury. In addition to 
acting as a framework, bones often 
play a crucial role in the protection 
of organs. The skull, for example, 
protects the soft tissue of the brain; 
the spinal column shields the spinal 
cord; the pelvic bones help guard 
the kidneys and other organs of the 
abdomen against damage; and the 
ribs help avert injury to the lungs 
and other organs of the chest. With 



BONES 


the aid of muscles attached to them, 
bones also make movement possible. 

Bones are a part of the connective 
tissue system, one of the most wide¬ 
spread systems of the body. Gen¬ 
erally, this system consists of col¬ 
lagenous or fibrous tissue or both, 
but bone also contains mineral mat¬ 
ter which gives it hardness. 

Bone originates from small, ir¬ 
regularly shaped cells called osteo¬ 
blasts, which are believed to come 
from the connective tissue system. 
During the early stages of bone 
formation, these cells manufacture a 
soft substance which forms around 
them and into which animal material, 
called ossein or gelatin, and minerals, 
mainly calcium phosphate and cal¬ 
cium carbonate, are later deposited 
to impart the stony quality. About 
one-third of the weight of bone is the 
animal material; the rest is mineral. 
In the childhood disease rickets, 
which is caused by a deficiency of 
vitamin D, the bones lack adequate 
mineral material and are relatively 
soft. The long bones of the legs bend 
under the weight of the trunk, and 
other bone malformations occur, de¬ 
pending upon the degree of softening. 
Vitamin D is essential to the metabo¬ 
lism of calcium in the human body. 

Bone difficulties can accompany 
old age. Osteoporosis is charac¬ 
terized by a general decrease in bone 

Bones — Bones of the human body have 
three general forms: long bones (as seen 
in the upper arm and leg), flat bones (in 
the skull) and irregular bones (in the ankle 
and wrist). This photograph of a disarticu¬ 
lated skeleton shows the approximate loca¬ 
tion of these 200 odd bones. The three 
bones shown separately in the upper left of 
the photograph represent the breast bone. 






SONl::> 


uvji-Hca 


nass with resulting strains on the 
skeleton. Usually a thinning of the 
long bones in the legs develops, some¬ 
times with spontaneous fractures. 
The cause is a reduction in osteoblast 
activity so that new bone is not laid 
down at a rate needed to replace 
worn bone. Osteoporosis may also 
occur earlier in life, as a result of 
metabolic disturbances such as dia¬ 
betes, overactivity of the adrenal 
glands, or as a consequence of 
vitamin deficiencies, particularly 
vitamin C, or starvation. 

The growth of bones in childhood 
and adolescence determines the height 
and body structure of the person. 
This is usually hereditary, but is often 
influenced by diet. Frequently im¬ 
proved nutrition results in offspring 
who have attained heights several 
inches above those of their parents. 
In some instances, disturbance of the 
glands which regulate growth may 
cause either giantism or dwarfism. 
The anterior portion of the pituitary 
gland, a gland located at the base of 
the brain, is particularly involved 
with the growth of long bones, and 
may undersecrete, causing dwarfism, 
or oversecrete, producing giantism. 
Either condition should be treated 
by an endocrinologist, a physician 
who specializes in glands and their 
secretions. Dwarfism can be treated 
by the administration of pituitary ex¬ 
tract. Undersecretion of the thyroid 
gland, which causes cretinism, in 
which the mental and physical 
growth of the child is stunted or slow, 
can be corrected by administration 
of thyroid extract. 

The number of separate bones in 


the human body is generally given 
as 206. Up to the age of twenty-two, 
the number of bones in men differs 
from that in women, because of the 
changes that take place in the joining 
together of small bones to make up 
larger ones. While every bone has a 
name, bones are classified into four 
types, according to their shape, These 
include the long bones, such as those 
in the arms and legs; the short bones, 
such as those in the fingers; the flat 
bones, such as the shoulder blades 
and skuU bones; and the short and 
irregular bones, like those of the 
wrist, ankles, and spinal column. 
Bones which are both long and flat, 
like those of the wrist, breastbone, 
and lower jaw, are classified as mixed 
bones. 

The three most significant charac¬ 
teristics of bone are hardness, 
strength, and lightness. While miner¬ 
als produce hardness and animal and 
mineral matter both contribute 
strength, the hollowness, such as in 
the long bones and spongy bone tis¬ 
sue, found in many places, accounts 
for lightness. 

The cavities of all bones in the 
body are filled with marrow, which 
in the bones of the young and in 
spongy bones of adults is red. Red 
marrow is considered a valuable 
breeding place for red blood cor¬ 
puscles. Marrow in adults generally 
is yellow. Marrow consists of con¬ 
nective tissue interlaced with a net¬ 
work of small blood vessels. In the 
meshes ef this network are various 
kinds of cells, including red and 
white blood cells, connective tissue, 
and fat cells. An examination of bone 



BONES 


BONES 


marrow tissue has become an ad¬ 
vantageous technique for the diag¬ 
nosis of many disease conditions, 
pernicious and other anemias, and 
ailments such as hypersplenism, 
leukemia, and lymphoma. 

Externally bones are smooth and 
are covered with a tissue called the 
periosteum, a tough fibrous structure 
which gives support to the ligaments, 
tendons, and muscles attached to the 
bone. The periosteum also admits 
blood vessels and nerves to the un¬ 
derlying bone, and, in case of a frac¬ 
ture, helps produce callus to protect 
the injured area. If the periosteum 
itself becomes badly damaged, the 
bone beneath may die because it re¬ 
ceives nourishment from that cover¬ 
ing. 

Bone is assured the good blood 
and lymph supply which it requires, 
just as other tissue of the body does. 
Some of the blood vessels are in the 
marrow or center of the bone, others 
pierce the periosteum through holes, 
the foramina, and enter a system of 
canals called the Haversian canals, 
which branch their way to the bone 
cells, enabling the blood vessels to 
carry the nutriments needed for 
growth and repair of the bones. 
Bones, however, sometimes become 
diseased as a result of infectious 
material being carried from other 
areas of the body through the blood 
vessels in the Haversian canals. Tu¬ 
berculosis is among the most com¬ 
mon of the bone infections. Nerve 
cells, too, branch through these 
canals and produce sensations of pain 
in event of injury to the bone. In¬ 
flammation of the periosteum, or 



Bones — Bones of the hand, arm and shoul¬ 
der articulated to show the 27 bones of the 
hand and wrist, the two bones of the for’e- 
arm {radius and ulna), the upper arm bone 
(humerus), the shoulder blade (scapula), and 
the collarbone (clavicle). The large triangular 
flattened bone is the scapula. 

osteomyelitis, an inflammation of the 
deeper bone tissue, usually due to in¬ 
fection, also produces much pain. 
Growth, however, does not cause 
pain, and if a child complains of pain 
in the bones or joints, it should not 
be dismissed as “growing pains” but 
investigated by a physician. 

The function of a bone chiefly de¬ 
termines its shape and substance. If 
fundamentally needed for leverage, 
as in the legs and arms, the bones are 
long; for flexibility, as in the spine 
and fingers, the bones are usually 
short and irregular; and for protec¬ 
tion, flat, as in the skull. The spinal 
column is constructed so as to supply 
both rigidity and strength, since it 
has to support the entire body with 
the exception of the lower limbs 







and also supply flexibility for bend¬ 
ing, turning, and twisting. The spine 
is also designed to absorb the shock 
of violent movement and impact. To 
do this, twenty-four bones called 
vertebrae have been shaped to fit to¬ 
gether in a way that permits strength 
and mobility. Two small bones, the 
sacrum and the coccyx, at the end of 
the spinal column are fused into a 
single bone. 

Bone must be both hard and strong 
enough to withstand the weight and 
pressure to which it is continually 
subjected, the strain from the pull 
of muscles and tendons, and the ac¬ 
cidental blows it receives. Bone build¬ 
ing does not end with maturity. Child¬ 
hood is the period of the greatest 
growth in size, strength, and shape 
of bone, but bone building is a daily 
process which continues throughout 
a lifetime. The diet of everyone, not 
only young and growing children, 
should include ample mineral-con¬ 
taining foods, proteins, and vitamins. 
Children need a larger amount of 
calcium and phosphorus-containing 
foods, such as milk and cheese, and 
adequate vitamin D. Older people 
also require milk, though the period 
of intense bone growth is over, and a 
pint of milk daily is advisable. Nec¬ 
essary amounts of vitamin C, vital to 
connective tissue health, should be 
assured. 

Although the bony structure has 
amazing tensile strength and flexibil¬ 
ity, it can and frequently is pushed 
or shocked beyond the straining 
point. A closer knowledge of the 
structure might help people avoid 
distressing injuries. For example, a 


joint is an area where one bone joins 
another or where bones “articulate.” 
These joints are classified as movable, 
slightly movable, and immovable. 
Most joints are movable and of 
several distinct types: the ball-and- 
socket joints, such as that of the hip; 
the hinge joints, such as that of the 
knee; the pivot joints, such as that 
of the skull which rests on the spine; 
and gliding or sliding joints. 

The ends of bones in movable 
joints are usually enlarged and fit 

1 Cranium 

2 Frontal 

3 Parietal 

4 Temporal 

5 Occipital 

6 Sphenoid 

7 Zygomatic 

8 Nasal 

9 Maxilla 

10 Mandible 

11 Cervical vertebrae 

12 First rsb 

12a Thorocic vertebrae 

13 Clavicle (collarbone) 

14 Sternum 

15 Thoiacic cage 

16 Twelfth thorocic verfebro 

17 Twelfth rib 

18 Lumbar vertebrae 

19 Sacrum 

20 Ilium 

21 Coccyx 

22 Symphysis pubis 

23 Humerus 

24 Radius 

25 Ulno 

26 Carpol bones of wrist 

27 Metacarpal bones of hand 

28 Pholanges 

29 Scapula {shoulder blade) 

30 Femur 

31 Pafello 

32 Fibufo 

33 Tibia 

34 Fool bones 

35 Torso! 

36 Melotcrsal 

37 Asfragolus 

38 Calcaneus (hcelbone) 





BONES 


ISUIMfci 


each other so well that force is 
needed to dislocate them. The ends 
of bones articulating with one an¬ 
other are covered with cartilage 
which replaces the periosteum. The 
cartilage is covered at the end with 
membrane, except at the place where 
the bones articulate, called the 
synovia, which secretes a fluid that 
keeps the joints lubricated at all 
times. This fluid prevents the friction 
that inevitably results when parts 
move on each other and keeps the 
cartilage and the bone at the end 
from wearing down. In osteoarthritis, 
a disorder which in some degree 
afflicts most people over sixty-five 
years of age, a wearing down or fray¬ 
ing of the cartilage, and sometimes 
even of the bone tissue beneath, often 
occurs. This is not the same disease 
as rheumatoid arthritis, which is a 
general disorder of the collagen tissue 
of the body, often symptomatized 
by swelling in the joints. 

Cartilage is tough, smooth, and 
elastic and forms a covering for all 
movable joints. Each spinal vertebra, 
for example, has circular pads of 
cartilage at the end. It is next to bone 
in hardness and is found elsewhere 
in the body where hard tissue is re¬ 
quired, as at the tip of the nose, 
ears, and windpipe. 

The types of injuries, outside of 
fractures, which are most likely to 
afflict bones and their joints involve 
tendons and ligaments. Tendons tie 
muscle to bone, and ligaments are 
tough bands of fibrous tissues that 
bind the articulating bones together. 
Sometimes ligaments form a circular 


band, a capsule, that surroumis the 
joint and attaches to the periosteum 
and the bone beneath. Ligaments do 
not have the ability to contract, but 
are slightly elastic and bear much 
of the brunt of injury in case of 
sprains and dislocations. 

In a sprain, for instance, a tearing 
of the binding ligaments occurs with 
swelling caused by ruptured blood 
and lymph vessels and an increased 
secretion of synovial fluid. In a dis¬ 
location, however, the articulating 
ends of the bones are displaced. The 
ligaments arc usually badly torn, the 
blood vessels at the joint severely 
injured, and the muscles around the 
joint are frequently in contraction be¬ 
cause of the pain. This muscular con¬ 
traction adds to the difficulties of 
getting the bones back into place. 
Injury to the nerves may also occur, 
and swelling and the degree of de¬ 
formity in the joint will depend on 
the extent of the injury. 

Crippling injuries to and malfor¬ 
mations of the bones, joints, and 
muscles are cared for by medical 
specialists called orthopedic surgeons. 
These doctors can make bone grafts 
to replace damaged areas, transplant 
bony tissue and create new sockets 
for the ends of bones which have 
been injured or destroyed by disease. 
A number of bone banks have now 
been established throughout the 
country, from which bone tissue can 
be drawn for grafting. By their work 
and skill and ingenuity, the ortho¬ 
pedic specialists have done much to 
free human beings from pain and 
suffering. They have repaired the 
crinoled in ereat numhens and re- 



BOOSTER DOSE 


BOTULISM 


stored to useful activity many people 
who would otherwise have been 
permanently disabled. See also 
cartilage; fractlires; osteitis; 
OSTEOMYELITIS. 

BOOSTER DOSE, “shot” of vaccine 
given some time after the original 
immunization to maintain the im¬ 
munity against certain diseases. The 
added injection of a particular vac¬ 
cine will greatly stimulate the for¬ 
mation of antibodies at a time when 
the concentration of antibodies may 
be at a low level. See also immuniza¬ 
tion. 

BORAX, chemically known as so¬ 
dium borate, a colorless transparent 
powder or crystal. Soluble in water, 
borax is used medicinally as an 
antiseptic, for stomatitis, an inflam¬ 
mation of the mouth, and as an in¬ 
gredient of various preparations used 
on the skin. 

In weak solutions, 1 pound of 
borax to 25 or 30 gallons of water, 
sodium borate effectively destroys 
larvae of flies on plants and animals. 
In an overdose, borax is a depressant 
poison, 30 grams of which have been 
fatal. 

BORIC ACID, a substance of color¬ 
less scales or crystals or a white 
crystalline powder, possessing the 
properties of a weak acid. Soluble in 
water, it is used externally as a mild 
antiseptic. For example, diapers may 
be rinsed in a saturated solution of 
boric acid in the case of intertrigo or 
“diaper rash.” Because of its action 
in deterring the growth of germs, a 
small amount of boric acid is an 


ingredient of many protective and 
soothing dusting powders. 

Boric acid eyewash soothes irritated 
membranes of the eye and inflamma¬ 
tion of the eyelids, or conjunctivitis. 
It is also extensively employed as an 
antiseptic first-aid dressing for burns, 
local infl ammations of the scalp, in 
the care of babies’ ears, and as a 
throat spray and mouthwash. 

Taken internally, boric acid is 
poisonous and can cause death. It 
should always be plainly and dis¬ 
tinctly marked in the medicine chest, 
and should be kept out of the reach 
of children. See also poisoning. 

BOTULISM, the most severe and 
dangerous of all food poisonings, 
which occurs as a result of eating 
canned and preserved foods which 
have been contaminated by the germ 
Clostridium botulinus. This organism 
produces a toxin or poison of extraor¬ 
dinary power, so great that one 
part of it in ten million will kill a 
mouse. The symptoms occurring in 
human victims of the disease are due 
to the toxin rather than to the 
presence of the organism itself. 

The toxin attacks the nerves, in¬ 
duces weakness and paralysis, in¬ 
cluding difficulty in swallowing, talk¬ 
ing, and seeing. Death, which finally 
results from respiratory failure, has 
occurred in 65 per cent of cases in 
the United States, although the death 
rate in Europe is much lower. 

The bacillus Clostridium is an in¬ 
habitant of the soil in every country 
in the world and is therefore a 
potential contaminant of everything 
grown in soil where it exists. In the 



United States, the danger develops 
when contaminated farm products, 
especially string beans, corn, spinach, 
asparagus, beets, and apricots, are 
preserved and canned b}' inadequate 
methods, and the germ survives, pro¬ 
duces its toxin, and poisons the food 
in the can or jar. The amount of 
toxin produced depends on the 
character and chemistry of the food 
in question, its acidity, the presence 
of sugar, and the quantity of heat 
applied to it. In Europe, preserved 
sausage meats and similar products, 
such as fish pastes, have been impli¬ 
cated most frequently. 

The foremost problem about the 
bacillus Clostridium is that its re¬ 
productive spores survive treatment 
that ordinarily disposes of micro¬ 
organisms. Six hours of boiling does 
not destroy them, nor does six min¬ 
utes’ exposure to steam pressure at 
fifteen pounds. The toxin itself is 
fortunately much less resistant and 
is rendered harmless by six minutes 
of boiling. 

While it is ordinarily safe to regard 
commercially canned foods as safe, 
and an outbreak of botulism from 
this source has not occurred for some 
time, the same cannot be said for 
home-preserved products, which are 
processed under less rigid standards. 
All home-canned foods should be 
boiled for six full minutes before 
being even tasted. One exception is 
those packed in brine, which renders 
a food reasonably safe. Cold salads 
of home-canned fruits or vegetables 
have been involved in several out¬ 
breaks of botulism, which could have 
been due to the use of containers or 


foods or both which were not steri¬ 
lized under pressure. This omission 
permitted the survival of the spores. 

Speed in summoning the doctor 
and securing treatment, which will 
consist primarily of administration of 
one or more antitoxins that have been 
developed, is a matter of life and 
death to the victim of botulism. 
Damage suffered from the toxin can¬ 
not be repaired. Ali that can be done 
is to arrest the progress of the poison¬ 
ing, and assist with secondary meas¬ 
ures. See alxo, food poisoning. 

BOWEL, the portion of the digestive 
system which extends from the stom¬ 
ach to the anus, and includes twenty- 
three feet of small intestine, five feet 
of large intestine, and the rectum 
which is about six inches long. 

The small intestine occupies most 
of the intestinal cavity, where it lies 
in coiled loops that can move about. 
The first portion, fixed to the pos¬ 
terior abdominal wall, is the duode¬ 
num, and the ducts of the liver and 
pancreas open into it. The rest of 
the duodenum is divided into the 
jejunum, about eight feet long, and 
the ileum, which is twelve feet long. 

Digestion takes place in the small 
intestine by means of secretions of 
pancreatic Juice from the pancreas, 
bile from the liver, and Juices se¬ 
creted by the intestine. These se¬ 
cretions are alkaline and are responsi¬ 
ble for the splitting of proteins and 
the digestion of carbohydrates and 
fats. 

Four hours are usually required 
for the food to be prepared in the 
small intestines. Then it moves along 



BOWEN'S DISEASE 


BRAILLE SYSTEM 


at the rate of an inch a minute. The 
intestinal walls have muscles, and the 
food is passed along by waves of 
muscular action. The bowel contracts 
immediately behind the bolus, or food 
mass, and relaxes in front of it. Be¬ 
sides this forward movement, the 
intestine regularly constricts, twenty 
to thirty times a minute, churning the 
food as it mixes with the digestive 
juices. The absorption of the food 
takes place almost entirely in the 
small intestine. At the juncture where 
the small intestine opens into the 
large intestine, a valve permits the 
contents to pass at regular intervals. 

The large intestine, about five feet 
long, includes the ascending, trans¬ 
verse, and descending colons. It 
handles the indigestible material 
which remains after the food has 
given the body its requirements. Food 
remains in the large intestine from 
ten to forty-eight hours, and its move¬ 
ment occurs periodically at intervals 
of about eight hours. 

The contents of the bowel pass 
into the rectum, where a mechanism 
is localized to indicate that material 
is ready to be expelled from the body. 
The desire to empty the bowel is a 
reflex, initiated by pressure on the 
walls of the rectum by the waste 
material or feces. At times, emotional 
disturbances may generate the reflex, 
as, for example, is often the ex¬ 
perience of combat troops when they 
first come imder fire. 

Any obstruction of action in the 
intestines is serious. A disorder may 
occur when one section of the bowel 
is drawn inside another section. 
This may be the result of a tumor, 


of indigestible material being im¬ 
pacted, or by the pushing of a 
portion of the bowel into a rupture. 
Such an obstruction causes severe 
pain and demands immediate at¬ 
tention by a physician. Since almost 
any acute condition of the abdomen 
may simulate intestinal obstruction 
by producing pain and vomiting, 
diagnosis must be meticulous. If 
actual obstruction exists, operation is 
usually necessary. See also intes¬ 
tines . 

BOWEN’S DISEASE, named after 
Dr. John T. Bowen, an American 
physician, a skin affliction believed to 
be of a cancerous nature. It occurs as 
circumscribed, horny elevations of 
the skin, as small as pinpoints or as 
large as peas, and may not damage 
adjoining tissues for long periods. 

BRACHIAL, a term relating to the 
arm. Brachial arteries, for example, 
extend along the inner side of the 
upper arm, and brachial glands are 
the lymphatic glands in the armpit. 

BRACHYDACTYLY, based on the 
Greek brachy meaning short, and 
dactyly meaning condition of fingers, 
a term denoting abnormally short 
fingers and toes. 

BRAILLE SYSTEM, a form of print¬ 
ing for the blind, wherein letters and 
characters are represented by raised 
dots or points punched in paper and 
elevated above the surface, so as to 
be easily recognizable to touch. It 
was perfected in 1837 by Louis 
Braille, a French teacher of the blind. 
Somewhat modified, it is now used 
universally. Books and periodicals 



BKAIN 


BKAIN 


in Braille can be obtained in most 
public libraries. 

BRA.IN. The human brain is a large 
mass of nerve tissues contained in the 
skull, connected to the spinal cord, 
and surrounded by three layers of 
tough membranes called the me¬ 
ninges. The brain cells, with the spinal 
cord, are interwoven into a complex 
relay system which collects, stores 
and sends out sensations and infor¬ 
mation. 

Over the centuries as man evolved 
toward his present state, man’s brain 
has developed and grown. Each area 
of the brain is responsible for the 
control of a particular part of the 
body, or for a particular group of 
sensations or impulses. 

Just within the cranial cavity and 
continuous with the spinal cord is 
the lower brain stem which controls 
the muscles and the sensory organs 
of the head. Above the lower brain 
stem is the part known as the mid- 
brain where eye movements and a 
number of involuntary muscular re- 
iexes are controlled. The cerebellum, 
which is the second largest single 
section of the brain, grows out behind 
the midbrain. Its function is to co¬ 
ordinate and integrate the action 


patterns from throughout the nervous 
system, and thus is responsible for 
smoothness of action. A disturbance 
in the cerebellum results in spastic, 
disjointed movements and lack ot 
muscular coordination. 

The hypothalmus is located di¬ 
rectly above and in front of the mid¬ 
brain. This group of ceils regulates, 
among other things, se.xual functions, 
body temperature, sleeping, and ag¬ 
gressions. The hypothalmus is in¬ 
timately connected with the pituitary 
gland and the other endocrine glands. 
The thalmus, which is involved with 
the emotions and with the integra¬ 
tions of basic patterns, and the paleo¬ 
cortex grow out of the brain stem 
above the midbrain and are con¬ 
tinuous with the largest and most 



Brain — The cerebrum, cerebeiluiti and medulla are three important ports of the brain which, 
in the average adult, weighs approximately 45 ounces and is well protected from injury by 
the hard, bony covering called the skull. The cerebrum, the largest portion of the brain, is 
composed of five lobes, each of which handles special functions, such as hearing, speech, 
sight, taste, emotions, judgment, etc. The cerebellum, the second largest port of the brain, is 
chiefly concerned with equilibrium of the body and coordinotion of the muscles. The medulla 
measures about one inch in length and is located at the lowest port of the brain where it 
gradually tapers off info the spinal cord. The pituitary actually is a gland which lies along 
the floor of the brain and is attached to it by a stalk. It is obout os large as a pea and tends 
to be larger in women, especially women who have given birth. A soddle-Iike bony structure 
surrounds ond protects this important gland which produces hormones, regulates growth and 
milk production, and acts as the "master" of all other alands in the bodv. 







complex of the brain’s parts, the 
neocortex or cerebrum. 

The neocortex, which is divided 
into two hemispheres, is made up of 
a thin layer of ceils and a subsurface 
mass of interlacing fibers. It repre¬ 
sents altogether about 70 per cent 
of the total nervous system. The sur¬ 
face is intricately folded to provide 
a maximum of surface space and the 
approximately seven billion nerve 
cells that make up the entire mass of 
the neocortex are interconnected in 
an almost unbelievable manner. Each 
of the cells has about 5,000 con¬ 
nections, or synopses, with other cells, 
and it is believed that every cell is 
connected at least indirectly to every 
other cell m the whole cerebrum. 
The cerebrum is divided into five 
lobes, each possessing special func¬ 
tions, which are only partially under¬ 
stood. 

The occipital lobes are responsible 
for the ability to differentiate color, 
size, shape, motion and distance, and 
thus to identify an object. An injury 
to these lobes can cause blindness. 
The temporal lobes are concerned 
with hearing, smell, speech and 
balance, and the parietal lobes with 
sensations of taste, weight, shape, 
and texture. 

The frontal lobes are the site of 
some of the most complex intellectual 
abilities, such as reason, emotion, and 
judgement. Furthermore, in back of 
the frontal lobes is a group of large 
cells, the motor cortex, which is 
involved with complicated voluntary 
muscular movements, including 
speech. If these cells are destroyed. 


a total loss of these voluntary move¬ 
ments results. The frontal lobes have 
numerous connections with the other 
lobes and the thalamus. Here feel¬ 
ings and emotions combine with 
other associations, and this combina¬ 
tion of feeling and knowledge de¬ 
termines most voluntary actions. 
Thinking, imagination, reasoning, and 
judgement all evolve as the sensory 
and emotional associations grow more 
complex. The manner in which these 
higher capacities are used constitutes 
personality and a disease in the 
frontal lobes produces distinct per¬ 
sonality changes, errors in judge¬ 
ment and weak emotional control. 

As can be seen, the human brain 
is a highly complex and fascinating 
organ. Much remains to be learned 
of its intricate functions and activity. 

BREAST, one of the paired mam¬ 
mary glands on the front of the chest. 
They are composed of fatty tissue 
and glands capable of producing milk 
and are ordinarily much more de¬ 
veloped in women than in men. At 
the center of each breast the milk 
glands fuse into a single outlet, the 
nipple, also more developed in the 
female. Since the growth of the 
breasts depends largely on production 
of female hormone, they may be¬ 
come larger in some young boys be¬ 
fore puberty, and also in men who 
develop hormone-producing tumors. 
The female breast is usually much 
larger during pregnancy, because of 
heightened production of female 
hormone and increased production 
of milk glands. 


75? 



iREATHlNG 


BREATHING 


the breasts, although in some cases 
the fact of pregnancy and nursing 
may improve the shape of the breasts. 

There are a number of common 
misconceptions about the breast 
which cause some women needless 
worry. It is not uncommon for one 
breast to be slightly larger than the 
other, but this difference in size is no 
indication that the breasts and their 
functioning are not normal. The size 
of the breasts, moreover, has no rela¬ 
tionship to the incidence of tumors, 
as is sometimes feared by woman 
with small breasts. The small-breasted 
woman is no more subject to tumor 
than the woman with large breasts. 

Many women, also, mistakenly be¬ 
lieve that an injury to the breast can 
cause cancer. An injury may, de¬ 
pending on its severity, damage the 
breast or breast tissue, but it will not 
produce cancer. Sometimes an in¬ 
jury, such as results from a direct 
blow, may lead to destruction of fat 
tissue within the breast; or it may 
lead to the formation of a blood clot 
if a blood vessel within the breast 
hemorrhages. In such cases a lump 
may be produced which superficially 
resembles the lump caused by a 
breast cancer. 

Some women, in an effort to pre¬ 
vent breasts from sagging, have been 
led to believe that special exercise or 
massage will correct this condition. 
There is no indication that either ex¬ 
ercise or massage will have the de¬ 
sired effect. Sagging may, however, 
be adversely affected by marked fluc¬ 
tuations in weight, which have a ten¬ 
dency to weaken the ligaments sup- 
■norting the breasts. 


Breastplasty operations, or plastic 
surgery upon the breasts, may be re¬ 
sorted to in cases of marked enlarge¬ 
ment of the breasts (hypertrophy) or 
marked sagging (pendulous breasts.) 
Plastic surgery is also used sometimes 
when a woman feels an exaggerated 
distaste to the appearance of her 
breasts, and the surgery serves to 
help an emotionally disturbed state. 
Breast surgery for cosmetic purposes 
should not be undertaken lightly. It 
involves a major operation and should 
be performed only by specialists. Not 
all breast plastic operations are uni¬ 
formly successful, and asymmetry to 
a certain degree may result. After 
surgery for pendulous breasts, there 
should be no tendency for them to 
sag again unless the woman gains a 
great deal of weight. 

Breast plastic surgery has no effect 
on pregnancy, but it generally makes 
nursing impossible; hence such oper¬ 
ations are usually advised after the 
childbearing period is finished. 

The breasts of some women be¬ 
come, especially before a menstrual 
period, exceedingly tender and en¬ 
gorged, causing alarm in certain 
cases. Ordinarily, this is a normal 
premenstrual phenomenon. However, 
if the sensitivity or pain becomes ex¬ 
treme, it is advisable to consult a doc¬ 
tor in order to reduce the tenderness. 
See also cancer; feeding, breast; 
mastitis; pregnancy and prenatal 

CARE. 

BREATHING is a function of the 
lungs. When breathing, oxygen it\ 
the air is taken into the lungs and 




Breathing— The lungs take m oxygen from 
the air and give off carbon dioxide from 
the blood. 


carbon dioxide with some additional 
moisture is breathed out. The lungs 
are constructed like a sponge. Small 
spaces are surrounded by tissues 
which contain tiny blood vessels. 
When air comes into these spaces, 
the tiny blood vessels take up oxy¬ 
gen. During exhalation, the carbon 
dioxide is passed out of the blood 
and into the air spaces, then into 
larger tubes, known as bronchial 
tubes, and then into the trachea, or 
windpipe, and out ‘of fhe body. The 
air'changes take place at about the 
rate of four quarts per minute. 

During sleep, breathing occurs 
from twelve to fifteen times per min¬ 
ute. Breathing is more rapid when 
a person stands up and when he 
exercises than when he is at rest. 
It is also more rapid when a person 
is excited. 

In various people the capacity of 
the chest differs. The amount of air 
which passes in and out of the chest 
is known as the vital air. All of the 
extra air that can be breathed in 
above this amount is called comple- 


mental air. All ot the extra air that 
can be breathed out after the lungs 
are emptied in the normal manner 
is called supplemental air. The vital 
capacity of the human being is the 
total of the three amounts. 

Some people can stop breathing 
for from twenty seconds to a min¬ 
ute. if a person breathes deeply or 
normally for about one minute and 
then takes a deep breath, he can 
hold his breath about three times as 
long as he could if all of the air 
were expelled just before attempting 



Breathing — The swallowing ond breathing 
paths. Since the pharynx connects above 
with the nasal cavity and below with the 
mouth cavity, it is a common passageway 
for both air and food. The pharynx meas¬ 
ures about five inches long. Air enters the 
pharynx, goes to the larynx, the trachea, 
bronchi and lungs. Food olso enters the 
pharynx but then it goes into a seporote 
channel, the esophagus, and posses on to 
fhe stomach. 



BROMIDES 


to do without breathing. The factor 
that controls this is the amount of 
carbon dioxide in the lungs at the 
time when he begins to hold his 
breath. 

Shortness of breath is a serious 
symptom. In many instances it is 
related to heart disease but in others 
to a different factor. People who are 
overweight are frequently short of 
breath simply from the extra load 
they carry. Sometimes shortness of 
breath is associated with nervous 
exhaustion. See also aspiration; 

RESPIRATORY DISEASES. 

BROMIDES, compounds of bromide, 
a poisonous, caustic, nonmetallic 
element, with another element. 
Among others, bromides of potas¬ 
sium, calcium, iron, ammonium, and 
sodium are used in medicine. Bro¬ 
mides generally have a sedative effect 
and allay nervous tension. For more 
than half a century, bromides have 
been employed in the control of 
epileptic attacks and other spasmodic 
afflUctions. More recently, however, 
safer and more effective sedatives and 
anticonvulsants, such as phenobar- 
bital and dilantin, have been found. 
Some people are as allergic to the 
basic bromine as they are to some 
other drugs and may develop skin 
rash, boils, inflammation of hair 
follicles and other inexplicable symp¬ 
toms during the course of a disease. 

Taken over a long period, bro¬ 
mides have a cumulative effect. 
When the level gets too high, bro¬ 
mide intoxication, or bromism, oc¬ 
curs, with such symptoms as head¬ 
ache, coldness of the extremities. 



Breatfiingi — illustrations of chest and ab- 
domina! motion in breathing of newborn 
babies. Irregularities in rate and rhythm of 
breathing occur even in normal newborn 
infants. The lack of co-ordination between 
the chest and abdomen creates a type of 
"seesaw'' action. This kind of breathing is 
evident during the first two weeks of life. 

drowsiness, apathy, delirium, hal¬ 
lucinations, and pallor of the skin. 

Blood tests for bromide intoxica¬ 
tion, have been developed in the 
laboratory and are relatively simple. 
Once the condition is discovered, it 
can be eliminated by continuous 
baths and doses of salt. 

BRONCHIAL TUBES. See bron¬ 
chiectasis; bronchitis; bronchial 
pneumonia; pneumonia. 

BRONCHIECTASIS, a chronic en¬ 
largement of the major or minor 
passages which carry ak to and from 
the lungs; it usually produces an 
accumulation of infected mucus, con¬ 
sequent violent coughing, and mark- 







Breatliiiisi Tract — The anafomy of the 
breathing tract. Air enters the mouth and 
nose and passes down the windpipe (tra¬ 
chea). The windpipe divides into two tubes, 
one going to the right lung and the other 
to the left lung. These tubes which are called 
the bronchi (singular, bronchus) conduct air 
to the lungs. The bronchus on the right is 
shorter and broader than the one on the 
left The hair-like projections which line the 
windpipe prevent foreign material from 
entering the bronchus and lung. 

edly offensive breath. The cause may 
be an acute infection such as tuber¬ 
culosis, pneumonia, or bronchitis, a 
protracted asthmatic condition, or a 
foreign body in the main air passages. 

In the violent bursts of coughing 
characteristic of bronchiectasis, the 
person discharges large amounts of 
purulent mucus, sometimes as much 
as a quart a day. In severe cases, he 
may have to maintain a position in 
bed or in a chair that will help in 
draining the mucus from within the 
chest. Severe attacks of fever, in¬ 
creased spitting, loss of weight, and 
sometimes night sweats and bleeding 


from the lungs are other manifesta¬ 
tions of bronchiectasis. Inflammation 
and scarring eventually render as¬ 
sociated areas of the lung useless and 
threaten the rest of the body with 
further infection. 

Patients are often so depleted by 
the disease that normal activity be¬ 
comes impossible. Anemia is a fre¬ 
quent complication. Rest, proper 
food, fresh air, and sun are usually 
the basis of treatment. Penicillin and 
sulfonamide drugs are useful, espe¬ 
cially in early stages of the disease. 
If bronchiectasis becomes chronic, 
some form of surgery is often neces¬ 
sary. Air may be injected into the 
cavity around the lung to collapse it 
and give it rest, or a phrenic nerve 
may be severed. In some cases, a part 
or all of the lung is removed. See also 

LUNGS. 

BRONCHITIS, the condition caused 
when the bronchial tubes become in¬ 
flamed or infected. The bronchial 
tubes are large delicate tubes that 
carry air into the tiny branches and 
smaller cells of the lungs after this 
air has passed through the mouth, 
nasal passages, and windpipe, or tra¬ 
chea. Usually inflammation or infec¬ 
tion begins as a cold which persists 
and leads to chronic cough. The bron¬ 
chial tubes may become infected after 
measles, whooping cough, or influ¬ 
enza, or during infection with any of 
the germs that infect the nose and 
throat. Viruses may also cause bron¬ 
chitis. Bronchial irritation from ex¬ 
cessive smoking, inhaling noxious 
gases or fumes and irritating dusts 
may lead to inflammation and bron¬ 
chitis. Frequently chronic irritation 







BRONCHOPNEUMONIA 


BRONCHOPNEUMONIA 


from these substances will weaken 
the resistance of the lining of the 
bronchioles and they become more 
susceptible to infection by germs. 

Some people seem more prone to 
develop bronchitis than others. The 
tendency to bronchitis seems greater 
in the spring and fall when weather is 
changeable. Bronchitis is common in 
small children. 

In typical bronchitis after a cold, 
the symptoms are a feeling of tight¬ 
ness in the chest, fever, a wheezing 
type of breathing, and coughing. At 
first the cough is dry, but as the 
irritated bronchial tubes produce 
abundant mucus, phlegm is then in¬ 
duced. 

Treatment of bronchitis includes 
administration of such drugs as peni¬ 
cillin to combat infection, if it exists, 
and also medications to loosen the 
phlegm within the bronchial tubes 


to permit easier breathing. The use of 
a vaporizer in the bedroom at night 
is often recommended, since moist 
air tends to loosen phlegm and make 
breathing easier. Adults with bron¬ 
chitis should avoid contacts which 
further irritate the bronchial lining 
membranes, such as smoking and oc¬ 
cupations involving inhalation of 
dusts and fumes. 

The chief danger of bronchitis is 
that pneumonia may develop. Other 
hazards are the development of pus 
pockets in the lungs and scarring of 
lung tissue. Bronchitis should be 
treated promptly by the physician 
when first discovered, to avoid such 
complications. Rest, fresh air, sun¬ 
shine, and nutritious food are essen¬ 
tial in building the body’s defenses. 

BRONCHOPNEUMONIA, a type 
of inflammation of the lungs, caused 


Ero!icbosco|se — A fube-like instrument with a light on the end, the bronchoscope, is 
passed through the throat down to the lung. The bronchus and lung areas can be visualized 
and a piece of tissue obtained for microscopic study. The bronchoscope is a valuable aid in 
diagnosing lung abscesses, cancer and in localizing foreign bodies. The patient is conscious 
during the procedure but there is a loss of sensation in the chest area because of local 
anesthesia. 



by germs such as the pneumococci, 
streptococci, Friedlander’s bacillus, 
or by a number of others. In children 
under three, pneumococci are usually 
responsible. Bronchopneumonia is a 
hazard to life all year round, and its 
various forms claim their victims at 
every period of life. 

In contrast to lobar pneumonia, in 
which one or more lobes or large 
divisions of the lobes are affected, 
bronchopneumonia is caused by scat¬ 
tered pus forming patches of in¬ 
flammation in the lung. In most in¬ 
stances, bronchopneumonia begins 
with an infection of the nose, throat, 
or bronchial tubes, or as a compli¬ 
cation of another disease such as 
whooping cough, measles, influenza, 
or a common bronchitis. As a second¬ 
ary disease brought about by a va¬ 
riety of organisms, it may affect all 
age groups, but as a primary disorder 
bronchopneumonia occurs only in 
children under three years of age. 

The aged often become victims of 
bronchopneumonia because of their 
tendency to accumulate mucous 
material in the lungs. As the power of 
the lungs to repair themselves has 
diminished, small areas of degener¬ 
ated tissue are affected and the ac¬ 
cumulating material must be expelled 
from the lungs. The continued in¬ 
halation and coughing results in dis¬ 
turbances such as bronchopneumonia. 

The disease may not start as 
abruptly as other types of pneumonia. 
Symptoms like fever, coughing, and 
shortness of breath gradually become 
worse. The temperature lowers step 
by step with recovery. 


Such drugs as the sultanilaraides 
and antibiotics are most frequently 
used in the treatment, and the re¬ 
sponse is best if the invading organ¬ 
isms are susceptible to them. See also 
PNEUMONIA. 

BRUCELLOSIS. See undulant 

FEVER. 

BRUISES, injuries, sufficiently se¬ 
vere, to the surface of the body 
which do not break the skin. If the 
skin breaks and bleeds, the wound is 
called a laceration. Bruises are usually 
caused by bumping against hard or 
sharp surfaces, by falls, or by blows. 

The characteristic discoloration 
that follows injury to the small blood 
vessels in the tissues beneath the skin 
or, at times, to infiltration of blood 
into the muscles is a hematoma. As 
a blood clot forms, the skin becomes 
dark and when the pigment material 
is absorbed, the area becomes bluish, 
then brownish, and finally yellowish. 

Some people bruise much more 
easily than others, probably because 
their blood vessels are more permea¬ 
ble or fragile, permitting blood to 
escape with greater facility. In other 
instances, hematoma may develop be¬ 
cause the blood itself does not con¬ 
tain enough of the substances that 
permit prompt clotting. Some women 
bruise more easily during menstrua¬ 
tion. Obese and anemic pereons are 
more susceptible to bruises than 
others. 

Most bruises heal without atten¬ 
tion. Cold applications or heat by 
hot compresses or electric pads give 
relief if the bruise incites swelling or 



BUBO 


BUERGErS DISEASE 


pain. Massage is not advisable. Some 
bruises require attention because of 
possible complications beneath the 
skin under the bruised area. A bruise 
of the larynx, for instance, may 
have many complications, such as 
pain when swallowing and speaking, 
shortness of breath, hoarseness, and 
even suffocation, and prompt atten¬ 
tion by a physician is imperative. 
An injury of the scalp is also signifi¬ 
cant because of a possible skull 
fracture. There have been cases in 
which the only symptom of a rup¬ 
tured liver was a slight bruise on the 
surface of the body. 

In severe cases the injured part 
should be rested, and if much swell¬ 
ing occurs in an arm or leg, absorp¬ 
tion of blood can be promoted by 
elevating the limb or application of 
heat. If a secondary infection invades 
the blood clot, a serious condition can 
result. Usually the blood in the clot 
beneath the skin is readily absorbed, 
but if the pressure of the clot menaces 
nearby parts of the body, the phy¬ 
sician may remove the accumulated 
material. When muscles are injured, 
blood infiltrates them, the muscle 
fibers swell, and the resulting lumps 
may be so large that a physician must 
make incisions to remove the clot. 
See also contusion. 

BUBO, a painful inflammation or 
swelling of a lymphatic gland, which 
usually develops in the groin, espe¬ 
cially after venereal infections. An 
abscess caused by injury or irrita¬ 
tion, not by infection, is a “sympa¬ 
thetic” bubo. See also lymphogran¬ 
uloma VENEREUM. 


BUBONIC PLAGUE, an acute in¬ 
fectious disease caused by bacteria 
transmitted by the rat flea. It is 
characterized by enlargement of the 
lymphatic glands and toxic symptoms 
of great severity. The mortality rate 
is high. See also plague. 

BUERGER’S DISEASE, a condi¬ 
tion of the blood vessels in which 
the linings are inflamed so that 
blood clots form and passage of the 
blood is slowed. The disease, scien¬ 
tifically known as thrombo-angiitis, is 
named after a physician named Buer¬ 
ger, who first wrote a description of 
the condition, establishing it as a 
specific disease. 

Usually Buerger’s disease starts 
with pain in one leg and later ap¬ 
pears in the other. The legs become 
cold. There may be spasms of the 
blood vessels in the legs. With the 
interference that occurs in the blood 
supply, there may be swelling and 
even ulceration and gangrene. The 
severity of the symptoms depends 
on the extent to which the condition 
has progressed. 

While Buerger’s disease involves 
the legs more often than any other 
part of the body, it may occasionally 
involve the arms and sometimes 
both the arms and legs. In still other 
cases it may affect blood vessels 
elsewhere in the body. Buerger’s dis¬ 
ease mostly affects men between the 
ages of twenty and fifty. At one 
time it was thought that it affected 
particularly Jewish people. Now it 
is known that it may affect people 
of any race or religion and that 





women are frequently affected as 
well as men. 

One of the most important aspects 
of Buerger's disease is its relation¬ 
ship to excessive smoking. Since 
smoking to excess has definitely been 
shown to have deleterious effects on 
the blood ves.sels and on the circula¬ 
tion of the hlood, most physicians 
are convinced that there is a definite 
relationship between excessive smok¬ 
ing and Buerger’s disease. Because 
of the danger of gangrene as a result 
of Buerger’s disease, people with this 
condition are urged particularly to 
watch the care of the feet. The phy¬ 
sician can make recommendations 
relative to the care of the feet, the 
improvement of circulation and 
other matters helpful in controlling 
this condition. 

BULBAR, in medicine, a term per¬ 
taining to the medulla of the brain. 
Formerly the medulla oblongata, the 
lower part of the brain stem, was 
called a bulb. 

BULBAR POLIOMYELITIS. See 

POLIOMYELITIS. 

BUNION, a painful swelling and 
overgrowth of bone on the foot. The 
deformity usually affects the large 
toe, the joint becoming swollen while 
the tip of the toe is forced outward 
against the other toes. Occasionally a 
bunion will occur on the top of the 
foot. The skin is usually thickened. 

Biiergert Pisecis® — Exercises to encour¬ 
age circufotion of blood tn the feet and 

improve elimination of fluid wliich couses 

swelling. 






BURNS 


BURSITfS 


Bunions are often caused by poorly 
fitted footwear; and properly fitted 
shoes, perhaps padded, will usually 
help to relieve the discomfort. Com¬ 
plete relief, however, is brought 
about only by surgical removal of 
the bunion together with a part of 
the overgrown bone beneath it. 

BURNS. A burn is a searing of the 
flesh which can be caused by many 
agents—from hot steam to the sun’s 
rays. Each year over 6,000 fatal 
burns occur in the United States and 
burns are a common cause of death 
in young children. Burns involving 
over one-third to one-half of the 
body are often fatal, especially in 
children. 

Bums are classified into three 
groups and in all cases symptoms and 
treatment are somewhat similar. (1) 
First-degree bums involve only red¬ 
dening of the skin and usually re¬ 
quire only cleaning with soap and 
water and the use of a soothing 
ointment. (2) Second-degree burns in¬ 
clude blistering of the skin as well as 
superficial burning. (3) Third-degree 
bums cause destraction of the tissue. 
Second- and third-degree bums are 
best treated by promptly covering the 
bum with warm, wet compresses 
until the doctor arrives. Wet saline 
compresses are beneficial. In larger 
bums, gauze permeated with petro¬ 
leum jelly is used to keep the area 
clean and free from infection as well 
as to prevent excess loss of fluid in 
the injured area. To counteract shock, 
which in severe burns may be fatal, 
the victim should lie flat without a 
pillow, have his clothing loosened. 


and be kept covered with a light 
blanket until the doctor arrives. See 
also SHOCK. 

BURSA, a small fluid-filled sac which 
serves as a cushion against friction 
among joints that move upon each 
other. For example, a bursa lies be¬ 
tween the heel bone and the Achilles’ 
tendon. See also bursitis. 

BURSITIS, an inflammation of a 
bursa; one of the most frequent 
rheumatic ailments. A bursa is a 
small sac situated between joints 
that move on each other, a kind of 
lubricating part around them. An 
inflamed bursa contains calcium de¬ 
posits in a semisolid state. Bursae in 
any of the joints may become in¬ 
flamed. Most frequently, however, 
the shoulder is affected; bursitis of 
the elbow and above the knee is less 
frequent. 

Ordinarily bursitis is extremely 
painful in both the acute or chronic 
form. It may appear suddenly, follow¬ 
ing c hillin g, strains, blows, or infec¬ 
tion. Frequently bursitis results from 
excessive use of a joint, as, for ex¬ 
ample, in playing tennis, or prolonged 
standing or stretching. Chronic bur¬ 
sitis may be a consequence of acute 
bursitis or it may be a chronic mani¬ 
festation from the beginning. 

The symptoms of acute bursitis are 
always a sharp pain and discoloration 
at the spot where the inflammation is 
located. In some cases, limited 
swelling is present and the inflamed 
bursa can be felt. In chronic bursitis, 
swelling and tenderness fluctuate and 
progress with intermittent pain, 
brought on perhaps by changes of 



BUTTOLKS 


ow I I 


weather or excessive use of the joint. 

Sometimes acute bursitis heals 
without any treatment. The inflamed 
bursa may drain itself, through rup¬ 
ture. Resting the afflicted part, how¬ 
ever, is always imperative. Hot or 
cold applications, whichever the 
patient prefers, are often soothing, 
and exposure to the sun may help 
relieve chronic recurrent pains. Most 
physicians do not recommend mas¬ 
sage under any circumstances. If the 
pain does not subside with such usual 
palliatives as aspirin, analgesic drugs, 
or even codeine, morphine or other 
narcotics may be prescribed by a 
physician. Sometimes he will irrigate 


the bursal cavity by needle or by 
incision and drainage. 

Cortisone and ACTH have been 
successful in relieving severe cases 
of bursitis, but these drugs must be 
used for long periods. Deep x-ray 
therapy often brings good results. See 
also BURSA. 

BUTTOCKS, the two fleshy parts 
of the posterior part of the body on 
which one sits; they are formed by 
the glutei or buttock muscles. 

BUTYN, a trade name for butacame 
sulphate, a substitute for cocaine as 
a surface local anesthetic for mucous 
membranes and eyes. 




CAISSON DISEASE, also known as 
“the bends,” compression air disease, 
and diver’s palsy, a condition caused 
by a too rapid return from high to 
normal sea level atmospheric pres¬ 
sure. The nitrogen in the body ap¬ 
pears in the blood as nitrogen bubbles 
which obstruct the circulation. Cais¬ 
son disease is limited to certain 
occupations, occurring mostly in 
divers and tunnel workers who work 
under high atmospheric pressure and 
then are subjected to rapid reduction 
of air pressure. 

Principal symptoms of Caisson 
disease are pain in the legs or abdo¬ 
men, dizziness or staggers, and itch¬ 
ing of the skin. Partial or total in¬ 
sensibility, paralysis of face, arms, 
and legs on one side of the body, 
paralysis of the lower part of the 
body, and pronounced nervous symp¬ 
toms may also develop. The first 
sensation, a feeling of pressure in the 
eardrums, is often relieved by swal¬ 
lowing. 

Experience has shown that re¬ 


compression of the worker, followed 
by slow decompression overcomes 
the symptoms of Caisson disease. If, 
however, the symptoms are not 
promptly relieved, the worker is 
placed in a high-pressxure chamber 
or tunnel where he remains for a long 
period of time (this is known as the 
“overnight soak”). Afterward he re¬ 
ceives gradual decompression. 

CALAMINE, zinc carbonate, pulver¬ 
ized and cleansed. In compounds it 
is used externally as an astringent 
and dusting powder. As a soothing 
protection, calamine lotion is applied 
in cases of sunburn, insect bites, acne, 
and other skin irritations. 

CALCIUM, a silver-white, soft metal 
which occurs only in combination 
with other elements. It is present in 
spring and river waters and in plants 
and the bodies of man and animals. 

The body of the average person 
contains significant amounts of 
thirteen minerals. Of them aU, cal- 




cium is present in the largest amount 
and is one of the most essential. It 
is present in and vital to the health 
of every known tissue and cell in 
the body. It is a significant element 
in building strong bones and teeth. 

Research on the nutritional value 
of minerals in food, conducted by the 
Chemistry Department of Columbia 
University, led to the conclusion that 
“Diets with low calcium content have 
a harmful effect on well-being and 
health of far greater significance than 
hitherto supposed.” The encyclopedic 
yearbook published by the United 
States Department of Agriculture un¬ 
der the title Food and Life states 
positively, “In spite of the fact that 
knowledge of effective measures for 
the prevention of calcium and other 
mineral deficiencies is at hand, there 
is abundant evidence that a consider¬ 
able proportion of the general popula¬ 
tion of all ages does not receive 
adequate amounts of calcium.” 

A calcium deficiency may be in¬ 
volved in the cause of so-called de¬ 
generative diseases—those diseases 
involving a loss in the power of 
functioning of any part of the body— 
such as hardening of the arteries, 
some allergies, disorders of the heart, 
kidney, and blood vessels. The U. S. 
Department of Agriculture publishes 
lists of foods rated as excellent or 
good in calcium richness, which can 
be used as a guide in helping to as¬ 
sure an adequate supply of calcium 
in the diet. Listed as excellent are: 
broccoli, buttermilk, cabbage, chard, 
Cheddar and Swiss cheese, clams, 
dandelion greens, kale, milk in all 
its forms—^whole, skimmed, evapo¬ 


rated, condensed, and dried—molas¬ 
ses, mustard and turnip greens, 
watercress, and yeast. Listed as good 
are: almonds, artichokes, all kinds of 
beans including dried, kidney, string, 
and snap, carrots, celery, cottage 
cheese, crabs, cream, eggs, endive 
or escarole, dried figs, lettuce, lob¬ 
sters, maple syrup, oysters. 

If foods were listed in the order of 
their significance, milk in its various 
forms, excepting butter, would lead 
the list, followed by green, leafy 
vegetables. 

To insure a good supply of cal¬ 
cium during pregnancy and elimi¬ 
nate leg cramps, physicians irequently 
prescribe calcium in different com¬ 
pounds as a dietary supplement. See 
also nutrition; vitamins. 

CALCIUM-PHOSPHORUS RATIO. 
A particular balance between cal¬ 
cium and phosphorus must be main¬ 
tained witW the body so that healthy 
tissue evolves from strong bone cells. 
Therefore, both calcium and phos¬ 
phorus are essential in the diet. 

CALCULUS, a stone, or concretion 
of mineral salts, which forms most 
frequently in the cavities of the body 
which act as reservoirs for fluids. 
Often the stone takes its name from 
the cavity in which it grows—for ex¬ 
ample, kidney stone or gallstone. 
Calculi may develop in any tissue in 
which calcium or other minerals are 
deposited. 

The calculus usually takes its 
mineral content from the fluid in 
which it is found. Its nucleus, how¬ 
ever, may be a small blood clot, a 
bit of dried mucus, or some other 




Calorie — Energy balance means that the amount of energy, expressed in calories, taken 
in as food equals that given off as work. The diagram indicates the amount of energy con¬ 
sumed per hour in various representative activities. It can be seen that when one works hard 
or plays strenuously more food must be eaten. 


foreign body which may have entered 
the cavity. 

The stone ordinarily does not be¬ 
come evident until it begins to pass 
out of its cavity. Then it may produce 
a severe pain, called renal colic if the 
calculus is a kidney stone, or biliary 
colic if it is a gallstone. See also 
BLADDER, DISEASES OF; COLIC; GALL¬ 
STONES; KIDNEY. 

CALLUS, generally any area of 
hardened, thickened skin caused by 
friction, pressure, or other irritation. 
It is also new tissue which forms 
where a fractured bone heals. 

Most calluses—for example, those 
on the palm of the hand—do not 
cause trouble and do not require 
medical attention. But in other loca¬ 
tions calluses may cause pain. For 
instance, when pressure is exerted on 
a heavily thickened callus on the foot 
at a point where it is caught between 
the shoe and the prominent bones 
beneath the ball of the foot, treat¬ 
ment may be necessary. Paring 


off the outer layers of the hardened 
skin with a sharp knife or file is the 
usual way, but chemicals also are 
sometimes used. In severe cases, re¬ 
lief is secured by inserting a pro¬ 
tective device within the shoe or by 
changing the area of weight bearing. 

Great care must be taken not to 
damage the delicate tissue beneath 
the callus by cutting too deeply. 
Diabetics and persons suffering from 
any arterial disease must never try 
to treat corns or calluses themselves. 
It is better to prevent calluses by 
making certain that shoes are properly 
fitted, by avoiding continued pressure 
irritation, and by taking sensible care 
of the feet. See also feet. 

CALOMEL, mercurous chloride, a 
white, almost tasteless and insoluble 
powder. It was formerly commonly 
used as a purgative. It has also served 
as an antisyphilitic, an intestinal 
antiseptic, and as a kidney stimulant. 

CALORIE, the unit by which the 



inergy value of food is measured. 
Specifically it is equivalent to the 
amount of heat required to raise one 
cubic centimeter of water one degree 
Centigrade. Foods vary widely in 
their caloric contents. For instance, 
a pound of butter will supply a vastly 
larger number of calories than a 
pound of lettuce. By checking the 
number of calories consumed against 
the energy output charted for a per¬ 
son’s age, height, weight, and oc¬ 
cupation the doctor can determine 
whether or not the person eats too 
many, too few, or sufficient calories 
for his daily needs. If too many, the 
excess is stored as fat in specially 
provided cells in the body. If too 
few, the body draws either upon its 
fat deposits or tissues to make up the 
deficit and the person will show a 
weight loss. If caloric intake and 
energy output balance, weight tends 
to remain stable. See also nutrition. 

CAMPHOR, a volatile oil with a 
characteristic aromatic smell. It is 
obtained naturally from a tree native 
to eastern Asia, and artificially from 
turpentine oil activated by hydro¬ 
chloric acid. It is a mild irritant and 
cooling antiseptic when applied to the 
mucous membranes and the skin. 

Camphorized ointments and oils 
aid the relief of nasal congestion, but 
must not be used for infants or small 
children. In acute inflammations of 
glands, camphor has been beneficial 
as a cooling pain reliever. 

Occasionally camphor is used by 
injection to stimulate the circulation 
of the blood, in the treatment of pain¬ 


ful diarrhea, vomiting, and as a medi¬ 
cine to induce perspiration. See also 

POISONING. 

CANCER, a disease characterized by 
abnormal and often unpredictable 
growth of cells. Cancerous growths 
are also disposed to invade normal 
healthy tissues which can be de¬ 
stroyed or even replaced by their 
wild growth. Nerves may be affected, 
causing pain; blood vessels may be 
broken open by the invading growth, 
causing hemorrhage; and structures 
such as lung tissues, the arteries, kid¬ 
neys, or bladder may be obstructed by 
infiltration of cancer tissue. Every 
part of the body is susceptible to can¬ 
cerous growths, though some organs, 
such as stomach, bowel, lung, and 
the sexual organs, seem more fre¬ 
quently involved. 

Accumulations of rapidly growing 
cells may form a lump known as a 
tumor, but not all tumors are can¬ 
cerous or dangerous. Many, such as 
fibromas, clumps of scar-type tissue; 
adenomas, clumps of harmless 
glandular tissue; warts, fatty tumors, 
or lipomas do not invade normal tis¬ 
sue and do not lead to serious con¬ 
sequences. They are benign or harm¬ 
less growths or tumors. Groups of 
cells which invade normal tissue and 
destroy healthy cells are malignant. 
Growth may be rapid or slow, but 
usually is progressive; that is, the 
cancers do not stop growing once 
they originate. 

Some cancers remain in one loca¬ 
tion; others tend to spread through 
the blood stream or lymphatic stream 
throughout the body. These “pilgrim- 



CANCER 


CANCER 


Wte Cancer Strikes 


2.5%p ?KIN'~CJi.5% 
5.3%# MOUTH ii,2% 


i WOMEN 


2.6% i G 

6.3%URINARY 13.3% 


9.9% Mother PLACES^::,1].^ 




Charfi by Graphics Institute, N.Y.C. 


type” growths, metastases, in general 
represent a more serious type of can¬ 
cer. 

The exact cause of cancer is un¬ 
known. Some scientists believe that 
persons are bom with abnormal cells 
and that these remain quiescent 
throughout life or until some factor 
starts them growing. Others believe 
that chronic irritation of a certain 
group of cells may lead to cancerous 
changes. Cancer of the lip is com¬ 
mon in pipe smokers and lung cancer 
in cigarette smokers. Some specialists 


feel that irritation from the sun may 
lead to skin cancers, common in 
farmers and outdoor workers. Chemi¬ 
cals also may induce cancer. The sex 
hormones are related to cancer de¬ 
velopment, especially of the breast 
or reproductive system. Because 
wives of circumcised men rarely de¬ 
velop cancer of the cervix, some ex¬ 
perts believe that the uncircumcised 
male may harbor a cancer-producing 
secretion imder the foreskin. A rela¬ 
tionship may exist between failure 
to breast feed and breast cancer. 






skin Concer — There are various types of 
skirs cancer. To identify what type of cancer 
is affecting the hand, a piece of tissue will 
be removed for examination (biopsy). Lab¬ 
oratory tests and microscopic study will 
reveal what kind of cells make up the tissue 
and thus the type of cancerous tumor present. 

Heredity is probably significant, but 
just how is not yet known. Cancer is 
probably not contagious; neverthe¬ 
less, experiments utilizing our knowl¬ 
edge of viruses are being made to 
confirm this. 

Kinds of cancer. Doctors classify 
cancer according to many factors: 
the type of tissue involved; the speed 
of its growth; the portion of the 
body involved; and sometimes even 
according to the chemical changes 
that take place within the tumor. 

Some cancers are easily seen or 
felt, such as breast and skin cancers; 
some can be detected or suspected 
by rectal or vaginal examination and 


by introduction of instruments into 
the stomach; some by x-ray, by blood 
or urine tests, and by other tech¬ 
niques. 

Certain cancers—for instance, 
breast cancers—are found predomi¬ 
nantly in women; lung and mouth 
cancers are more common in men. 

The symptoms of early cancers are 
often barely noticeable; therefore, 
everyone should have a complete and 
thorough medical checkup at least 
once a year, and oftencr if abnormal 
symptoms occur. Lives are need¬ 
lessly lost because cancer is diagnosed 
much too late for the doctor to 
achieve successful treatment. Often 
the symptoms are caused by a harm¬ 
less condition, but delay in treatment 
can be hazardous. 

Any of the following symptoms 
should be checked promptly by a 
competent physician. 

Mouth. Any sore in the mouth, or 
anjrwhere for that matter, that lasts 
more than a few days without healing 
should be reported. 

Larynx. Hoarseness that persists 
for more than a week, and for three 
weeks at the most, should be sus¬ 
pected. By examination of the vocal 
cords, the doctor can determine 
whether or not they are inflamed or 
irritated, or affected by tumors of a 
benign or malignant nature. Removal 
of the growths and examination of 
the specimen under the microscope 
will aid in making the diagnosis. 

Breast. Any discomfort, pain, 
thickening, dimpling, or lump in a 
breast of a man or woman that docs 
not disappear within a week, and any 
discharge from the nipple, bloody or 


CANCER 


CANCER 


otherwise, demands immediate atten¬ 
tion. Delay can be perilous. If the 
doctor demands surgical removal of 
the lump for expert examination, this 
should be done without delay as only 
by microscopic examination of tissue 
can definite diagnosis be made. 

Stomach. Stomach cancer seldom 
causes pain. Ordinarily early signs 
include loss of appetite, diarrhea, ap¬ 
pearance of black material in the 
stools, regurgitation, or difficulty in 
swallowing food. Generally ffiese 
symptoms point to conditions less 
serious than cancer, and the doctor 
can make correct diagnosis by using 
x-ray and other techniques. 

Female organs. Prolonged, irregu¬ 
lar, or unusual bleeding, especially 
after the age of thirty-five or between 
periods, should always be investi¬ 
gated promptly. 

New aids to cancer diagnosis. Can¬ 
cer may be diagnosed in many dif¬ 
ferent ways, some simple, others 
complicated. Most significant is a 
detailed history of the onset and na¬ 
ture of the patient’s symptoms, fol¬ 
lowed by a thorough examination. 
When suspicious growths are noted 
on the skin, in the breasts, or within 
the reproductive organs, the doctor 
may take a piece of tissue for ex¬ 
amination under the microscope. This 
is known as biopsy. Ihe cancer cell, 
when viewed under the microscope, 
is different from the normal cell. In 
some cases, changes in the cells may 
be difficult to detect, even by experts. 

Among the most recent medical 
discoveries is the Papanicolaou test 
for cancer. In this test, scrapings 
taken from the surface of the cervix 


of the uterus or from the walls of the 
vagina are treated with certain 
chemicals. The tissues are then placed 
under the microscope, where careful 
examination can usually rule out or 
indicate the presence of early cancer 
changes. The test can be used on the 
sputum of presumed lung cancer, and 
also on stomach secretion when can¬ 
cer in that organ is suspected. 

Tissue from within the body can 
be removed for analysis by curettage, 
as in the uterus when the uterus wall 
is scraped. Investigation may be per¬ 
formed by bronchoscopy, in which a 
long tube is inserted into the lung 
structure to remove tissue; by gas¬ 
troscopy, done with a stomach tube; 
or proctoscopy, in which a long 
telescope-like instrument is inserted 
into the rectum. These instruments 
used for detecting cancer are often 
provided with a light so that the 
operator can actually look into the 
organs. 

X-ray is invaluable in detecting 
cancer. To aid in finding stomach or 
rectal cancer, barium, a white sub¬ 
stance, is introduced into these or¬ 
gans and helps x-rays detect any 
tumors by outlining them. Occa¬ 
sionally substances may be injected 
into the blood stream which outline 
the kidneys or other organs. 

Blood tests for the detection of 
cancer, except for cancer of the 
blood, are being studied extensively, 
but as yet none of the tests has been 
accepted. 

Is cancer caused by a germ? Some 
scientists are inclined to feel that can¬ 
cer may be caused by a virus, a form 
of living growth too small to be seen 



under the microscope. Already there 
seems to be evidence that certain 
substances like viruses can cause can¬ 
cers. A factor that passes through the 
mother’s milk in mice has been 
found capable of causing cancer in 
other mice. However, this finding 
is not applicable to human beings. 

Another technique that has 
aroused interest is the attempt to 
grow tumors in yolk sacs of develop¬ 
ing chicks. Here certain viruses are 
grown and distinguished from one 
another. Success has been reported in 
growing transplants from breast can¬ 
cer on yolk sacs of chick embryos. 
This may not prove that viruses cause 
cancer, but rather that cancer cells 
can grow on a suitable medium if 
transplanted. At present experiments 
are being conducted on human beings 
by inoculating volunteers with deadly 
cancer cells. The results may have 
far-reaching effects on our knowledge 
and treatment of cancer. 

Hormones, particularly sex hor¬ 
mones, may stimulate cancer growth. 
These include the female hormone, 
estrogen, and the male hormone, 
testosterone. Estrogens in large 
amounts may stimulate growth of 
breast cancers while they may delay 
growth of male cancers, notably 
prostate cancers. The male hormone 
may actually help to stop the growth 
of female breast cancer, and con¬ 
versely stimulate prostate cancer. 

Is cancer hereditary? Studies on 
animals indicate that the tendency to 
develop cancer seems stronger in 


some families than m others, although 
there does not seem to be a true in¬ 
heritance. In some families, cancer 
apparently will develop in certain cir¬ 
cumstances. There!oie, when any 
cancer is common m one family, 
members of the family should avoid 
taking sex hormones and overex¬ 
posure to x-rays or to other chemicals 
or irritants. 

Cancer-stimulating substances are 
thought to include coal tars, x-rays, 
excessive exposure to the sun, viruses, 
and hormones. Mechanical irritation, 
such as tight girdles or collars and 
friction on a mole on the skm may be 
harmful. Rough teeth and improperly 
fitted dentures may, by causing irrita¬ 
tion, lead to cancer of the mouth, as 
may pipe and cigarette smoking. 

Cancer of the blood usually mani¬ 
fests itself by anemia, fatigue, loss of 
weight, and shortness ot breath. The 
diagnosis is made by examining the 
blood and a specimen of tissue taken 
from the bone marrow. 

Treatment. Surgery has always 
been one of the most effective ways 
to remove cancers. By the removal 
of localized growths, the patient may 
be completely cured. Approach to 
treatment may be varied, and may 
not, in some cases, even include 
surgery. X-ray, or radium treatment 
is employed successfully in many 
types of pelvic cancer. Chemical 
therapy includes hormone treatments 
of breast and prostate cancer, and 
also drug management of the leuke¬ 
mias, blood cancers. Often a com- 


Cancer — One 6f the greot hopes in cancer research Is chemotherapy, a chemical means of 
destroying cancer cells without injuring the patient. This scientist is checking op on a labora- 

i-hrtf !w«v lamvidi* clues in the tinendina seorclt for cwr#$ for COOCOf. 








bination of surgery, x-ray, and drugs 
is used. 

Most exciting of recent approaches 
to treatment is the use of radioactive 
isotopes. The isotopes are chemicals 
having radioactivity combined with 
a chemical element. Since these 
chemicals are likely to go directly 
to one tissue of the body, they con¬ 
centrate in that organ and destroy 
abnormal tissues there. Cancer of the 
thyroid has been successfully treated 
by using radioactive iodine. Iron, 
sodium, potassium, chlorine, bro¬ 
mine, calcium, strontium, sulphur, 
carbon, and hydrogen have all been 
subjected to experiments in con¬ 
trolling growths in various parts of 
the body. Radioactive phosphorus 
has also been applied externally to 
warts, moles, and other growths on 
the surface of the body, and in some 
instances with apparent success. 

The nitrogen mustard chemicals, 
developed for use in warfare, have 
been helpful in destroying cancer 
cells of the blood. These drugs are 
used effectively in Hodgkin’s disease, 
chronic leukemia, and in other forms 
of blood tumors. 

Much remains to be learned about 
cancer, and much will depend on the 
cooperation of patients in promptly 
reporting to their doctor any sus¬ 
picious signs. Regular yearly check¬ 
ups aid in early detection of cancers. 
CANCER, TREATMENT OF. The 
treatment of cancer differs in one 
fundamental respect from that of 
most other diseases. The cure for 
most other diseases is accomplished 
by the body itself; the treatment con¬ 


sists of creating favorable conditions 
for this self-help. In cancer, how¬ 
ever, the body defenses are helpless. 
Not only is the body unable to de¬ 
stroy the growth but actually it may 
nourish the cancer at the expense of 
the healthy organs and tissues. The 
successful treatment of cancer is 
one which eliminates or destroys all 
the cancer cells with as little harm 
as possible to the healthy cells and 
tissues of the body. 

The only means now' available for 
curing cancer are surgery and radia¬ 
tion. If a cancer is detected early 
enough—that is, when it is still 
localized and has not spread—such 
treatment has proved extremely 
valuable However, the more ad¬ 
vanced the cancer when treatment 
is started, the less likely is cure. De¬ 
velopments in surgical and radiation 
therapy combined with early diag¬ 
nosis have, without doubt, increased 
the cure rate. Unfortunately treat¬ 
ment of widespread cancer has not 
been successful. This has led to 
much research and an intensive 
search for chemicals, including hor¬ 
mones, which can seek out and de¬ 
stroy cancer cells anywhere in the 
body in a manner similar to the way 
in which antibiotics destroy bacteria. 

Surgery has been and still remains 
the most widely used treatment for 
cancer and has resulted in the high¬ 
est percentage of cures. The chance 
for cure is highest when the cancer 
is removed while still localized or 
confined to the tissue or organ where 
it developed. Cancers which have 
spread to the surrounding area may 



CANCER, TREATMENT OF 


CANCEi, TIEAIMENT OF 


be removed by more extensive 
(called radical) surgery, such as 
that of the breast in which the lymph 
nodes in the armpit are also re¬ 
moved. Better pre- and postoperative 
management of the patient as well 
as improved surgical techniques and 
antibiotics have improved the value 
and effectiveness of surgical treat¬ 
ment. 

Radiation therapy is not of equal 
value in the treatment of all cancers. 
Cancers vary greatly in their re¬ 
sponse to such treatment. For some 
cancers, such as those of the skin, 
lip, and cervix, irradiation may be 
the treatment of choice, giving better 
results than surgery. In others, both 
methods are equally suitable. Still 
others should be treated only by sur¬ 
gery. In still other cases, radiation 
therapy is used in conjunction with 
surgery as a pre- and postoperative 
treatment. 

With the recent development of 
new multimillion-volt x-ray genera¬ 
tors and radioactive Cobalt-60, many 
cancers deep within the body which 
were not previously within the range 
of radiation therapy may be treated. 
Better techniques have made pos¬ 
sible the more effective treatment of 
the cancer with less damage to the 
surrounding tissue. 

The injection into the body of 
radioactive isotopes has made pos¬ 
sible the treatment of certain wide¬ 
spread cancers. For example, radio¬ 
active iodine not only destroys some 
thyroid cancers but can also seek 
out metastatic spread of these can¬ 
cers throughout the body and elimi¬ 


nate them. Radioactive phosphorus 
has been used to treat cancer of the 
lymphatic system. Radioactive gold 
has been used in the treatment of 
prostate cancer. 

Hormonal therapy is used in the 
treatment of widespread cancers of 
the breast and prostate because these 
organs are influenced by hormones, 
which are internal secretions of the 
ductless glands. Treatment consists 
of removal of the sex and occasion¬ 
ally adrenal glands in order to re¬ 
move the source of the hormones 
which stimulate the growth of these 
cancers. Such treatment also makes 
use of female sex hormones to neu¬ 
tralize the male sex hormones in the 
case of prostate cancer, and the use 
of male sex hormones in the treat¬ 
ment of premenopausal women with 
breast cancer, and female sex hor¬ 
mones in the treatment of post¬ 
menopausal women. In some cases, 
like expectancy has been increased 
as much as a year. 

By chemotherapy is meant the 
treatment of cancer with chemicals 
which can identify, seek out, and 
destroy malignant cells and tissues 
but which will not harm surrounding 
normal healthy tissues. Because can¬ 
cer cells differ from normal cells— 
as demonstrated by their relatively 
uncontrollable wild growth—they 
probably differ in their food require¬ 
ments. This observation led to the 
possibility of discovering chemicals 
or drugs which can selectively starve 
or poison cancer cells. This idea is 
similar to that involved in the con¬ 
trol of bacterial infection by anti- 



CANKER SORE 


CAPILLARIES 


hiolic^j '\lthough cancers ha\e not 
been generalh cured b> drugs alone, 
some chemotherapeutic substances 
have been useful in easing or elimi¬ 
nating pain and prolonging life 
Thev have been particularly useful 
in treatment of leukemia and Hodg¬ 
kin's disease Among these drugs be¬ 
ing used are nitrogen mustard, 6- 
Mercaptopurine, methotrexate, and 
two long-named chemicals abbre¬ 
viated as TE\f and TEPA See also 

C SNC ER 

CANKER SORE, usually a small 
ulceration on the inside of the mouth, 
lips, and cheeks, which may appear 
from a variety of causes. Sometimes 
the cause stems from the nervous 
system; often the sore is a manifesta¬ 
tion of a sensitivity to certain sub¬ 
stances taken into the body; and fre¬ 
quently It is due to a virus infection 
such as a cold. Whenever canker 
sores appear persistently, a medical 
study should be made for some func¬ 
tional disturbance, including an ex¬ 
amination of the blood to determine 
the status of the clotting elements in 
the blood stream. Tests should also 
be made for sensitivity to various 
foods, and the fillings in the patient’s 
teeth examined, since it has been 
shown that dissimilar metals used as 
fillings in the same mouth may create 
electrical currents sometimes associ¬ 
ated with the appearance of cankers 
in the mouth. 

CANTHARIDES, popularly called 
Spanish fly, a bitter-tasting powder 
made from an insect known scientifi¬ 
cally as Canthaiis vasicatoria. The 
active principle in the drug is can- 


t barifiin, which is marketed in many 
forms, such as cantharidin plaster, 
blistering fluid, cantharidin ointment, 
and tincture of cantharidin. 

The drug should be used only 
when prescribed by a doctor, and the 
utmost precaution should be taken 
to prevent it from entering the mouth, 
the eyes, or other sensitive areas. 

Cantharidin is never used before 
the condition of the patient’s kidneys 
has been checked, since the drug is 
easily absorbed through the skin. It 
must not be applied to any part of the 
body on which the patient is likely 
to lie, since the heat and perspiration 
result in blistering. Furthermore, it 
is dangerous when applied to para¬ 
lyzed arms or legs. Such reputation 
as it has as a stimulant to sexual 
desire is without any good evidence. 

Cantharides is intensely irritating 
to the kidneys and should never be 
taken internally. In the treatment of 
children, the aged, or the weak it 
should never be used, even externally, 
for any purpose. 

Symptoms of cantharidin poisoning 
may be intense pain in the alimentary 
canal, in the stomach and kidneys, 
or in the urinary organs. 'Vomiting 
and diarrhea ordinarily occur, and a 
persistent desire to urinate is noticea¬ 
ble. The pulse is usually weak and 
slow and collapse is not unlikely. See 
also BLISTERS. 

CAPDLLARBES, the smallest 
branches of the arterial tree; fine, 
ffiament-like vessels through which 
blood pumped by the heart through 
increasingly smaller branches of the 
arterial tree finally passes by osmosis, 





AND GROWTH 










Here’s the first in a unique 
series of pictographs which 
depict the all-important 
needs of children as they 
grow from birth into the 
teens. These features are 
based on scientific studies 
and research 





’ff IS a a mg in pH 
age, ^4 child hns 
O' self-cor'troL is 


afivc: and learning to 
nuinage social rclafinrh 
skips. Lots 7olio 1 C 
him through a typiecd 
dciiL 


THBEE-Ycft.. . 1 , 








fm 



ciiv ci-SiraCiSG ■ 



Likes to have tarmlk’! 
stories read without 
cliange. Enjoys 
explaining pictures. 


«Wr1 



L’onter O) atientior; 
editing ifoth farni'v, 







u‘jtcfoppir,g fgars; of When he knows parent 
the dark, dogs, other are going out may say 
animais, fire engines. good-bye cheerfully. Or 
Needs reassurance. may protest until older 

'‘"f fei-f It.Wi r- , ■ 








Plays in bed for half Begins to talk about hss Frequently gets up i\''jay want to get In bed 

flour or so. Usually dreams and may occa- during night May get with mother. But can 

goes to sleep without sionaliy be wakened In out of bed and wagder usually be diverted if 

too many demands. fright by nightmare. . around the house. parent stays with himawhils 






iiVw} d! 




of ihoo'Sfi 
of of this 

,s‘/?oj’r fkaf fhofj havo 
(‘(lioio olnlkifo^o 
rofcy^^ff^ eho.rae- 

f( 00 CoffitjiOO. 

If k o holn to paff iks 
Iff In^fro' ivhaf on 
(poiorffl to c.rpcet nf 
fhfn a fit 


fm^umn 


k-fP 


,^r 


u 


Growing verba! ability. 
Sometimes expressed in 
such ways as quarreling, 
tattling. 



Vivid imagination is 
frequently expressed in 
dramatic play, imitation 
of adults. 





Play still needs some 
supervision. Quarrels 
may lead to too much 
hitting, kicking, throwing. 



Boys may play with 
dolls, girls with boyish 
toys. All right if each 
enjoys his own toys, too. 



Verbalfy-and sometimes 
physicaiiy-child 
dissents from his 
mother's authority. 



Works hard at drawing- 
though he may change 
theme in middle. 
Details are crude. 



He is beginning to 
understand rules and 
restrictions such as 
balls for throwing- 
not blocks. 





Likes to try musical 
instruments, play 
phonograph. Takes part 
in singing games. 



L-=2 

Child frequently clings 
affectionately to 
parents. Likes to be 
cuddled. Enjoys tumbling, 



May confuse parents’ 
answers about how 
babies are born with 
stories picked up elsewhere 





Bathing, toileting of 
both sexes together offer 
healthy ways to teach 
sex differences. 

:VrV 


I Can bathe himself if 
mother supervises. Can 
also partially dry 
himself. 









humor. Takes care of 


own immediate needs. 



Frequently annoys 
older brothers and 
sisters, bullies 
younger ones. 



Can almost completely 
dress himself if clothes 
are ready at hand. 



Very energetic. Adept on 
tricycle and climbing 
apparatus. Can handle 
some simple tools. 


:] 



Appetite is fair but il 
improving. Has definite |'| 
likes and dislikes. Eats li 
skillfully. i 


I 



Frequently wants toilet 
privacy but asks for help 
with wiping. Controls 
urination. 




Enjoys eating with | 
family. But interrupts I 
progress of meal by | 
talking, leaving table. I 



Makes intricate build- 
ings with blocks. | 
Admires his own work. 
Likes to have 
father help. . 




A peak age for crying j Listens with interest to 
and whining if bored or || verse and action stories 
hurt. Needs comforting, i -especially those 
then distraction. explaining how things wc 






i explaining how things work. 


Shows fear of dark, 
animals, fire engines, 
old people. May resent 
mother's going out. 


Goes to bed without 
serious objections- 
especially if he can 
recognize bedtime on clock. 



Enjoys nursery school or 
a play group, since he 
usually prefers play with 
others to solitary play. 



Will rest after lunch, 
but seldom naps. Plays 
quietly with books, toys. 



asking questions-both 
to get information and 
to make conversation. 



Less awakening because 
of nightmares now. May 
wake to go to toilet, 


needs help getting back. 








What your school beginner 
needs at this crucial time 
when he is entering a big 
new world. A feature based 
on scientific studies 




|\u‘.rS‘^h}J 11 HwU*'® 
ol u cpp eiery oigs^t 









Less home centered, more social minded, 
your child meets new responsibilities 
in these years. Here’s a cross section 
of research on his special needs 



Unobtrusive aid 
helps him to develop 
his own standards 
of decencyj fair play. 


Meeds tolerance of 
his nei'vous gestures 
--and a parental review 
as to their source. 


Should have an 
agreement with 
parents about time for 
homework, TV, movies. 


Matiiras when ahovt/ed 
to make decisions anc 
face non-serious 
consequences of mistake. 









They need to feel 
accepted by their age 
group and to take an 
active role within it. 



Appreciates moments of 
privacy and-if possible ; 
-a room of his own. 



Thrive when they shine | 
in some activity admired | 
by their group. f 


Want to conform to 
group's standards for 
dress, activities, 
possessions. 


Begin to develop friend- An understanding of 


ships with opposite 
sex and need to feel 
at ease with them. 


his own body, its 
changes and its 
capacities is important. 



Generally needs eight 
to ten hours of sleep 
a night. 






Wants enough money 
from odd jobs and his 
allowance to finance his 
personal projects. 


Looks to adults for 
guidance as to what is 
considered good 
manners and behavior. 




3 

iil 







i- 


'ti 


^ -. 

r-i 


1 H 

1 / 



Welcome opportunity 
to learn social dancing 
“though boys may be 
reluctant to admit this. 


Should be spoken to 

and directed on the _..v.. 

basis of mutual respect. | dignity and good sense 


Chooses some admired 
I adult for her model of 





Conformity to the group, independence 
toward parents, mark this as an important 
self-testing period. But tactful 
guidance is welcome 



broaden their first- which require high They should be encour- 

hand experience with degree of teamwork aged to try their skill 

the world around them. and organization. with new sports. 



Wants to feel that Gains family status by 

his views play an Must have the freedom being given family 

important role in to organize social activ- J responsibilities within 

family discussions. ‘ ities on grown-up lines. ; her capabilities. 



Require supervision to 
make sure they don’t 
get too tired from 
strenuous play. 



Need the goaf of a high 
minded moral code such 
as religion, Boy Scouts. 


, rr: , ^ I "'/7 7 - ‘ 





Needs tolerance | ^ 

toward his revolt | Assurance and guidance | Parents’ open recognition 

against adult ways | foster a positive attitude I that he is a worthwhile 

and standards. t toward sex roles. i individual is essential. 




Careful attention must 
be paid to develop¬ 
ment of individual 
potentialities. 






Mid-teens is a training ground for 
responsible adulthood. Understanding 
parents will alternate their helping hand 
with a hands-off policy 














rci;gh ino.'c j , j| 
uctsi/a mfo \ '■ 


! "f- 


lA'ar^is ^ifB paraii'is 
be models cf aopr 









program foster 
interestsmrnrb 
delinquency. 



ATier-sciiool and Tclerant attitude toward |EspectaHy need 

holiday youth center his need to be rough, I parents’ realize 

crogram foster tough and noisy is I aggressiveness 

nterestSjCurb essential. | of them are on 


parents reauzat 
aggressiveness h 
of them are only 






SB:':€S iKS 














CARBOHYDRATES 


CARBON DIOXIDE 


an exchange of substances, to the 
ceils of body organs and tissues. 
They are the mmute structural ele¬ 
ments which connect arterial circula¬ 
tion with venous circulation and 
which carry deoxygenated blood 
back to the heart. See also blood; 

CIRCULATORY SYSTEM. 

CARBOHYDRATES, organic sub¬ 
stances which contain carbon, hydro¬ 
gen, and oxygen and are stable, easily 
digestible sources of calories or nu¬ 
tritional energy. They belong to the 
class of nutriments represented by 
sugars, starches, celluloses, and gums. 
Foods with large carbohydrate con¬ 
tent are sugars, jams, jellies, pre¬ 
serves, syrups, molasses, honey, 
cocoa, chocolate, candy, grains, gram 
products, and farinaceous substances. 
Nuts, although they contain a larger 
proportion per weight of protem, and 
an even greater proportion of fats, 
are also substantial in carbohydrate 
content. All dairy products, fruits 
and vegetables have carbohydrates in 
varying amounts. Dates and figs are 
especially rich in this nutriment, and 
potatoes, parsnips, and most lentils 
are also plentifully supplied with 
carbohydrates. See also nutrition* 

CARBON DIOXTOE, a colorless 
odorless gas, a molecule of which 
consists of one atom of carbon in 
combination with two atoms of 
oxygen. It is one of the end products 
of the cellular metabolism of pro¬ 
teins, carbohydrates, and fats, all of 
which are carbon-containing com¬ 
pounds. It is given off by the body 
during that phase of respiration 
known as exhalation. The oxygen 


taken m durmg mhalation passes 
through the walls of capillaries linmg 
the lungs, combmes with the iron in 
the red blood corpuscles, is carried 
to the heart and from there distrib¬ 
uted by the arterial system to all the 
cells of the body. In these cells, to¬ 
gether with other substances, it en¬ 
ters into the chemical reactions 
essential to life. The carbon dioxide, 
among other waste products which 
result, passes through the cell walls 
into the venous blood supply, back 
to the heart, and from there to the 
lungs where it is exhaled. Although 
residual amounts in the blood stream 
are essential for normal body func¬ 
tion, carbon dioxide in sufficient con¬ 
centration can cause death. Generally 
the amount of this gas contained in 
the atmosphere is less than .03 per 
cent. In an unventilated room 
crowded with people, the concentra¬ 
tion might rise dangerously. An 
atmospheric concentration of about 
25 per cent is said to be lethal, but 
symptoms of a rising carbon dioxide 
concentration, such as headaches and 
drowsiness, would set in much earlier. 
In cities, carbon dioxide concentra¬ 
tion is increased by the combustion 
of carbon-containing compounds in 
transportation, heating, and indus¬ 
trial processes. Fortunately urban 
atmospheres are continuously re¬ 
freshed by winds which carry oxygen¬ 
laden air to the city and dust and 
carbon dioxide-laden air from it. The 
presence of green plants also helps 
decrease the carbon dioxide content 
of atmosphere, since plants predomi¬ 
nantly inhale carbon dioxide and ex- 


177 



CAiBOM MONOXIDE 


CARBUNCLES 


hale oxygea duiiiig the process of 
photosynthesis* This takes place dur¬ 
ing sunlight; and at nighty like the 
huEian beings the plant takes in small 
quantities of oxygen for its cellular 
metabolism and gwes off some car¬ 
bon dioxide as waste. Throughout a 
twenty-four-hour period, however, 
the plant removes much more carbon 
dioxide than oxygen, and gives off 
much more oxygen than carbon 
dioxide. 

CASBON MONOXIDE, a colorless 
odorless gas, a product of the incom¬ 
plete combustion of carbon. It is ex¬ 
tremely poisonous. It burns with a 
pale blue iame to form carbon 
dioxide. Carbon monoxide may de¬ 
velop when coal oil, charcoal, gas, or 
kerosene are burned in a poorly ven¬ 
tilated room. A frequent source of 
carbon monoxide is from the ex¬ 
hausts of automobiles. In the open 
air, the gas quickly becomes carbon 
dioxide, but m a closed garage a 
running motor may produce enough 
carbon monoxide to ME in a matter 
of minutes. 

Carbon monoxide invades the 
blood stream through the lungs, 
unites with the hemoglobin in the red 
blood corpuscles so that they cannot 
carry oxygen to the ceEs of the body, 
and asphyxiation ensues. The blood 
of victims of carbon-monoxide poi¬ 
soning is a bright cherry red. 

Early symptoms of carbon-mon¬ 
oxide poisoning include yawning, 
headache, nausea, dizziness, ringing 
in the ears, and abdominal pains. 
Gaspy breathing and unconsciousness 
quicMy follow. The victiin should get 

178 


fresh air immediately, and he should 
be kept lying down and warm. A 
physician should be called promptly, 
and inhalations of oxygen or of 
oxygen-carbon dioxide mixture ad¬ 
ministered. Pure oxygen accelerates 
the release of carbon monoxide and 
frees it from the blood about four 
times faster than simple inhalation of 
air. If the breathing of the victim is 
gasping or has stopped, artificial 
respiration should be given at once. 

If the carbon-monoxide poisoning 
is serious, the victim should be taken 
to the hospital as soon as possible 
for treatment which may include 
blood transfusions. Since the nerve 
cells are involved in the poisoning, 
temporary or permanent damage can 
be done to the brain, with serious 
disturbances of vision, hearing, 
speech, and memory. 

Because carbon monoxide cannot 
be seen or smelled, danger of poison¬ 
ing is especially insidious. Care 
should be taken that rooms in which 
fuels capable of producing carbon 
monoxide are being burned are 
properly ventEated, and that a car 
motor is not kept running in a closed 
garage. 

CARBUNCLES, painful infections 
of the skin layer below the surface, 
accompanied by the production and 
discharge of pus and dead tissue, and 
tending to affect the general health. 
A carbuncle may be distinguished 
from a bofl by its greater severity and 
depth and especiaEy by its having 
several openings instead of one. 

The first symptom of a carbuncle 



CARCINOGENS 


CARDIAC Am COiONAiY 


is a painful hard lump which develops 
under a tight and reddening skin. 
Several pus-discharging openings 
later appear in this surface. Eveotu- 
aEy the entire mass will tend to sepa¬ 
rate itself j leaving an open sore. 

Carbuncles appear most frequently 
on the face, neck, and shoulders. 
They particularly afflict persons who 
suffer from diabetes or Bright’s dis¬ 
ease. In such people resistance to 
invasive microorganisms which set 
up infection is lowered. 

The severity of the infection can 
often be diminished at the outset 
by means of x-ray treatment, sulfa 
drugs, or penicillin. The immediate 
pain may be relieved by the applica¬ 
tion of hot compresses. These in¬ 
crease the flow of blood, thus 
strengthening the defensive forces in 
the infected area. 

When the accumulation of pus be¬ 
comes considerable, the carbuncle 
should be opened and drained by a 
physician. Unless special precautions 
are taken during this operation the 
protective wall, which the tissues 
have built to seal the infection 
from the rest of the body, may be 
broken down, thus permitting the in¬ 
fection to spread. 

To avoid a repetition of this pain¬ 
ful and exhausting experience, the 
person should have himself tested 
for diabetes and Bright’s disease 
which predispose the body to this 
type of infection. The person should 
pay increased attention to the state 
of his general health; the body must 
develop resistance against such in¬ 
vasion. See also furuncles. 


agents that cause the development 
of cancer of any type—for example, 
certain tar or coal products. 

CARDIAC AND CORONARY. 

The word “cardiac” is frequently 
used as an adjective to replace the 
word “heart”; for example, cardiac 
disease, cardiac pain, cardiac acci¬ 
dents. The word “coronary,” which 
is used to describe the blood vessels 
that supply the heart with its blood 
and oxygen is associated also with 
other words to describe what may 
happen to the coronary artery. 
Thus, “coronary sclerosis” is a hard¬ 
ening of the coronary arteries; 
“coronary thrombosis” is a block¬ 
ing of the coronary arteries, and 
anything abnormal about the coro¬ 
nary arteries or their function is 
called “coronary disease.” When 
a blood vessel is closed by the for¬ 
mation of a blood clot, as in coro¬ 
nary thrombosis, the muscles of the 
heart are suddenly deprived of their 
blood supply. The area that is thus 
deprived of blood will not be able 
to carry on its work and the tissues 
begin to break down and degener¬ 
ate. This is called “coronary in¬ 
farction.” The area that does not 
have any blood is called an “in¬ 
farct.” Eventually healing occurs if 
the person lives and a scar replaces 
the damaged tissue. 

The various tissues of the heart 
are described according to their 
position as “endocardium” which is 
the lining of the heart; “pericardi¬ 
um” which is the sac which sur¬ 
rounds the heart; “myocardium” 

179 


CAMCINOGEMS, substances or 



CARDITIS 


CARPAL BONIS 



Cardiac and Coronary — One of the methods of treating the cardiac patient is the admin¬ 
istration of oxygen. Oxygen helps the patient to breathe easier and relieves the heart of 
much of its burden. Three Lions, Inc. 


whfich is the muscle of the heart. 
See also coronary thrombosis; 

HEART. 

CARDITIS, an inflammation of the 
heart, a manifestation and significant 
part of rheumatic fever. Internal 
carditis or endocarditis is the inflam¬ 
mation of the valves of the heart 
and membranes which line it. Peri¬ 
carditis is the inflammation of the sac 
which encloses the heart. See also 
BACTERIAL ENDOCARDITIS; ENDOCAR¬ 
DITIS; PERICARDITIS. 


CARMINATIVE, an agent which re¬ 
lieves flatulence and colic. 

CAROTENE, a chemical precursor 
of vitamin A, is a yellow pigment 
found in green and yellow vegetables 
such as carrots, sweet potatoes, yellow 
com, and string beans. It can be 
extracted in a chemical laboratory 
and is converted in the animal body 
into vitamin A. See also vitamins. 

CARPAL BONES, the eight bones of 
the wrist On the back of the hand, five 


180 



CARSICKNESS 


CASTRATION 


metacarpal bones connect the fingers 
with the wrist. 

CARSICKNESS. See motion sick¬ 
ness. 

CARRIER OF DISEASE, the agent 
which transmits a communicable dis¬ 
ease. It can be any of a vast number 
of things—air and dust, nose and 
throat secretions, sputum, clothing, 
insects. For example, certain mos¬ 
quitoes carry malaria, dengue, and 
filariasis. Disease-producing bacteria 
cannot penetrate unbroken skin and 
must enter by means of wounds, 
scratches, abrasions, or a natural 
opening of the body. See also 
bacteria; infectious diseases. 

CARTILAGE, a white, serai-opaque 
connective tissue characterized by 
extreme smoothness, elasticity, and 
toughness. It covers the ends of the 
bones where they meet to become 
joints. Circular discs of cartilage Ue, 
for example, between each layer of 
bone in the spine, acting as cushions 
or shock absorbers for these bones 
and for the strain to which the spinal 
column is subjected. Cartilage covers 
the movable joints of the legs, arms, 
and fingers, giving smoothness and 
resiliency to their movements. It is 
also found in other parts of the body, 
such as the tip of the nose, eyelids, 
ears, and the windpipe. 

CASCARA, a drug usually derived 
from the bark of a tree native to 
Mexico, and also from certain shrubs. 
Because of its effective action on the 
colon, cascara is widely used as a 
laxative. Usually cascara is prescribed 
in the form of an aromatic extract. 


Cascara sagrada, the bark of Cali¬ 
fornia buckthorn, is especially useful 
m cases of chronic constipation. 

CASEIN, the principal protein in 
milk. In milk, a liquid precursor, 
caseinogen, is present rather than 
casein itself. Converted into solid 
casein, for instance by rennet, a fer¬ 
ment in the stomach, it is the basis 
of curds or cheese. When mfik is 
drunk slowly, its casein content be¬ 
comes a light and flaky mass of 
curds in the stomach, rather than an 
indigestible dense body. This action 
is significant for children, older per¬ 
sons, or invalids. Casein is not only 
high in nutritive values, but also has 
many industrial applications in the 
production of plastics, paints, and 
adhesives. 

CASTOR OIL, a pale yellow oil, ex¬ 
pressed from the seeds of the ricinus 
or castor oil plant. It is an effective 
and prompt purgative and one of the 
oldest household remedies for con¬ 
stipation. It is likely, however, to be 
followed by costiveness and is there¬ 
fore seldom used in chronic con¬ 
stipation. Castor oil is also used to 
counteract the effects of acid splashed 
in the eye. 

The medicinal uses of castor oil 
have been recognized for centuries. It 
is mentioned in Egyptian papyri as 
an ideal purgative and as a stimulant 
for hair growth. The Incas of ancient 
Peru believed that castor oil possessed 
spiritual powers and used it to 
exorcise demons. 

CASTRATION, the removal of one 
or both testes or ovaries, with a 


181 



CATARACT 


CATARACT 


coEsequent deficiency of the endo¬ 
crine hormones, testosterone and 
estrogen^ It is one of the oldest 
surgical operations and was well 
known in earliest antiquity. Male 
foreign captives were castrated to 
prevent a mixing with foreign blood. 
Castration was sometimes a ritual 
which eliminated sexual desire so 
that an ascetic life could more easily 
be led. Among the self-imposed emas¬ 
culates were Origen and St. Francis. 
At various times in history, especially 
in oriental countries, boys were cas¬ 
trated to become eunuchs. Later 
young male sopranos in church choirs 
were castrated so that their voices 
would not change. Castration as 
necessary medical surgery, too, was 
applied in cases of injury or disease. 
A castrated male was not always 
considered inferior; in fact, as in 
ancient Persia, he was sometimes 
highly esteemed and given important 
court positions. 

Castration may be performed at 
almost any age. However, its effects 
are much more pronounced when 
performed before puberty. Removal 
of the testicles after puberty is ac¬ 
companied by fewer symptoms be¬ 
cause the body is fuUy developed. 
The early loss of testicular functions 
by injury, inflammation, or surgery 
results in definite characteristics. 
Castrated males, though often tall, 
are narrow-chested and effeminate, 
shy, gentle, placid, and lacking in 
endurance. Their voices are soft and 
highly pitched. While not necessarily 
bald, they do not have any hair on 
the face, armpits, and pubic areas. 
Obesity, especially layers of fat on 


the hips, are common, and pro¬ 
nounced breasts not tmusuai. Some of 
the secondary male sex characteristics 
do not change, however, if the oper¬ 
ation is performed after the age of 
sixteen. 

When the testicles are diseased or 
severely injured, castration is some¬ 
times essential—^for example, in cases 
of cancer of the prostate. Castration 
does not have any effect on sexual 
capacity, even though it has a pro¬ 
nounced one on sexual urge, and it 
does not prevent or increase sus¬ 
ceptibility to mental breakdown. 
Castration must be differentiated 
from sterilization. Sterilization is not 
mutilating and does not interfere with 
sexual physiology; only the pro- 
creative capacity is eliminated. 

Animals are usually castrated to 
make them plumper and more^.gentle, 
as well as to restrict capacity of re¬ 
production. In females, castration, or 
spaying, consists in removing the 
ovaries, and is medically termed an 
oophorectomy. 

CATARACT, opacity producing loss 
of transparency of the lens of the eye; 
if the lens becomes entirely opaque, 
sight is lost. A cataract may be 
present at birth, and in young people 
it may appear as a result of injury. 
However, most cataracts occur in 
persons between the ages of fifty and 
seventy and are due to the gradual 
degeneration of the tissues of the 
lenses. To some extent, a tendency 
to this degeneration may be heredi¬ 
tary. Although the disease may show 
itself at first in only one eye, in almost 
all instances it will eventually appear 


182 



CAIAiiH 


CATHAiliCS 


in the other also* The process is 
gradual and '"ripeness” or Ml opacity 
may take two years to develop. 

Among the earliest symptoms of 
cataract are red eyelids, unexplain¬ 
able da3d:iiiie headaches, small specks 
seen constantly before the eyes, and 
gradually worsening vision. These or 
similar symptoms should be called 
promptly, to the attention of a phy¬ 
sician skilled in treatment of eye 
disorders. Temporary eyesight can be 
maintained by frequent changes of 
glasses. 

Physicians generally agree, how¬ 
ever, that the only effective treatment 
for a cataract itself is an operation. 
Such an operation restores good 
vision to approximately 97 persons 
out of a hundred. The surgery, rel¬ 
atively simple, is followed by the 
prescription of so-called cataract 
glasses, which contain biconvex lenses 
to replace the clouded natural lenses 
that are removed. See also eye. 

CATAMMH, a term which was 
formerly used for inflammations of 
mucous membranes, especially those 
of the nose, throat, and the air pas¬ 
sages. A cold with secretions—as a 
‘Tunning nose,” for example—^was 
popularly called a catarrh. 

CATHARTICS, drugs or medicinal 
preparations that will relieve consti¬ 
pation and cause an evacuation of the 
bowels. Cathartics stimulate the 
muscular activity of the intestines and 
promote the flow of liquid to the 
bowels, thus flushing the alimentary 
canal. If the cathartic is especially 
strong, it is called a purgative. If it is 
mild, it is called a laxative. 


Elimination of waste is a natural 
process, assisted by coarse foods, 
water, exercise, and laxative material 
in the diet such as fruit juices, vege¬ 
tables, whole wheat, honey, and oat¬ 
meal. Most people can eliminate 
waste materials without artificial . 
stimuli. The frequency of defeca¬ 
tion—emptying the bowel—^is not 
significant in most cases. If the use 
of cathartics appears to be frequently 
necessary a physician should be con¬ 
sulted. The habitual use of cathartics 
irritates the bowels, weakens their 
normal movement, and results in ir¬ 
regularity of elimination. The in¬ 
cidence of hemorrhoids, for example, 
is high among those who habitually 
use cathartics. In obesity, the pro¬ 
longed use of cathartics is not only 
ineffectual but harmful 

Cathartics of any kind should 
never be taken when abdominal pain 
is present. This pain may be the 
first sign of a beginning appendicitis, 
and if an abdominal pain persists or 
appears to be exceedingly severe, 
medical treatment is imperative. 
When the appendix is inflamed, 
cathartics may increase the irritation 
and peritonitis may occur as a result. 
In many cases, such inflammation 
of the membrane which lines the in¬ 
terior of the abdominal cavity is 
fatal. 

Mineral oil and mineral oil modi¬ 
fied with various substances are 
among the mildest of the cathartics 
currently used. Mineral oil is a 
lubricant wMch relieves constipation 
by mixing with the material in the 
bowel, softening it, and permitting 
easier passage along the intestinal 


183 



CATHETER 


CAUL AT BIRTH 


tract. It is not fattening, as are 
other oils, because it is not absorbed 
by the bowels. The usual dose is one 
or two tablespoonfuls. Sometimes 
mineral oil is modified by the addi¬ 
tion of agar, a form of seaweed, or 
by psyllium seed or other mucilagi¬ 
nous materials which swell when 
water is added and increase the bulk 
of waste material, thus preventing 
possible leakage of the oh from the 
anus, the excretory orifice of the 
body. However, too much mineral 
oil may interfere with the absorption 
of vitamin A. Mineral oil is also 
modified by the addition of strong 
laxative material like cascara and 
phenolphthalein. Cascara is a plant 
laxative made from the bark of a tree 
and is also available in the form of 
extracts and aromatic mixtures. Phe¬ 
nolphthalein is a laxative widely used 
as the basis of most advertised laxa¬ 
tive remedies. This substance, which 
is a coal tar derivative, acts on the 
large intestine as a purgative. Some 
people are especially sensitive to phe¬ 
nolphthalein and in these cases its 
use will cause eruptions of the skin. 

Other methods of relieving con¬ 
stipation are glycerin suppositories, 
enemas, and castor oE, an old house¬ 
hold remedy. A tablespoon or two of 
milk of magn^ia taken occ asionally 
is considered a safe cathartic. Saline 
cathartics such as Epsom salt (mag¬ 
nesium sulfate), sodium sulfate, etc., 
are active cathartics, especially use¬ 
ful in inflammatory infections and as 
blood purifiers in cases of poisoning. 
See also constipation; medicine 
chest; and names of specific cathar¬ 
tics. 


CATHETER, a flexible or rigid tube 
used to drain fluid from various 
cavities of the body, especially when 
the normal outlets do not function 
properly. The tube may be passed 
gently through the nose to the Eu¬ 
stachian tube which communicates 
with the ear, for example, or through 
the penis or vagina into the urethra 
which connects with the urinary 
bladder. A catheter should never be 
forced into or through any cavity. 

Persons who use a catheter with¬ 
out professional assistance should 
remember that absolute cleanliness is 
essential. Before use, a catheter made 
of rubber or metal can be sterilized 
by being boiled in water for several 
minutes. If it is made of silk or 
some other material which could be 
damaged by boiling, it may be soaked 
in an antiseptic solution prescribed by 
the doctor. The hands of the person 
who passes the catheter should also 
be clean. When the catheter is to be 
passed through the mrethra, the end 
of the penis or the outer surface of 
the vagina is ordinarily washed be¬ 
fore the instrument is inserted. If 
difficulty is encountered in this proc¬ 
ess, an appropriate lubricant may 
be employed. 

After use, the catheter should be 
thoroughly cleansed with soap and 
water. Grease may be removed with 
denatured alcohol. The catheter 
should be carefully dried and returned 
to a clean container. A worn catheter 
should be replaced. 

CAUL AT BIRTH. Caul is a popular 
term for the sac in which the child 
lies during pregnancy. Part or all 


184 



CAUSALGIA 


CEREBRAL 


of this fetal membrane may be 
brought forth in labor, preceding the 
child. A caul at birth has sometimes 
been considered by superstitious 
people to be a sign of good luck. 

CAUSALGIA, a sharp burning pain, 
sometimes a symptom of injuries of 
the nerves, particularly the sensory 
nerves supplying the palms and soles. 
The disturbance may be associated 
with many vasomotor, digestive, and 
dermal changes in the affected parts. 

CAVITIES. See dental caries. 

CECUM, a portion of the bowel on 
the lower right side of the abdomen. 
It is the large blind pouch located at 
the junction of the large and small 
intestine. The appendix branches off 
the cecum. 

CELIAC DISEASE, an ailment 
which affects children under five 
years of age, most frequently between 
the ages of two and three. In celiac 
disease, the child is unable to digest 
and utilize fats, starches, and some¬ 
times sugars. Sensitivity to gluten 
from wheat or rye grains was recently 
established as the cause of this in¬ 
ability. The chad becomes weak and 
undernourished, anemic, and his 
growth is stunted. Sometimes the 
stomach is swollen, as in starvation. 
Since the chfid is not well, he may 
be irritable, sullen, and behavior 
problems result as a consequence. 
Usually he has little appetite and 
even when obviously hungry wifi 
often refuse food. Conversely he may 
eat voraciously, with no gain in 
weight. Severe diarrhea is almost 
always the most telling symptom 


and stomach cramps may accom¬ 
pany it. Most of these symptoms are 
common to other conditions, and only 
a doctor can determine if celiac dis¬ 
ease is the cause. 

Celiac disease is ordinarily treated 
by a special diet. Fats, such as butter, 
cream, fried foods, and ice cream, 
and foods containing wheat or rye 
grains are excluded from the diet. 
Sugar tends to increase the amount 
of gas and to provoke diarrhea, and 
natural sugars, as are found in fresh 
fruits, are best tolerated. Protein 
foods can usually be eaten with no 
ill effect, and so milk protein, egg 
white, lean meat, fish, liver, and 
protein-rich vegetables constitute 
part of the diet. Of special benefit is 
a milk preparation which is high in 
protein but low in milk sugar and fat. 
For a time bananas were considered 
beneficial and banana diets were pre¬ 
scribed. However, now it is felt that 
any benefit derived from bananas 
is due to the fact that bananas replace 
gluten in the child’s diet. Vitamin B 
complex supplements are also given. 

CELL, a mass of protoplasm con¬ 
taining a nucleus; it constitutes the 
basic unit of life. See also blood; 

BODY. 

CELLULITIS usually refers to a 
diffuse inflammation of connective 
tissue. However, any inflammation of 
the cells of the body, at any point, 
can be called cellulitis. This disease 
may be caused by various bacilli, 
such as streptococci, staphylococci, 
or pneumococci. 

CEREBRAL denotes anything that 
is related to the cerebrum, the chief 


185 



CEREBRAL ARIERiOSCLEiOSIS 

portion of the brain. For example, 
the cerebral cortex, also called ‘‘gray 
matter/’ is the outer part of the cere- 
bmm where most of the cell bodies 
are located. The cerebrum is divided 
by a deep groove into two cerebral 
hemispheres. These cerebral hemi¬ 
spheres are representative of approxi¬ 
mately 70 per cent of the nervous 
system. 

Ulnesses associated with brain in¬ 
juries are denoted by the addition of 
the word “cerebral,” as, for example, 
cerebral dysrhythmia which is epi¬ 
lepsy, and cerebral palsy or paralysis 
due to hemorrhage. See also brain. 

CEMEBEAL ARTERIOSCLERO¬ 
SIS. See SENILITY, 

CEREBRAL HEMORRHAGE. See 

APOPLEXY. 

CEREBROSPINAL MENINGITIS. 
Meningitis, as such, is not a definite 
disease but an inflammation of the 
meninges, the membranes of the 
brain and the spinal column. The in¬ 
vasion of the cerebrospinal column 
by microorganisms such as pneumo¬ 
coccus, staphylococcus, or strepto¬ 
coccus is usually responsible, but 
various viruses also cause meningitis. 

Cerebrospinal meningitis, also 
called spotted fever and cerebrospinal 
fever, is a sporadic or epidemic form 
of fneningitis caused by a germ, the 
meningocQCcus. This disease is char¬ 
acterized by inflammation of the 
cerebrospinal meninges. 

While the cause of cerebrospinal 
meningitis is not yet fully established, 
medical scientists believe that it is 


CEREBROSPINAL MEIMiNGITiS 

spread by contact with germ-laden 
droplets, produced by coughing and 
sneezing, from the nose and throat of 
infected carriers. The incidence of 
the disease, which most frequently 
affects children and adolescents, is 
highest in winter and early spring. 
In its epidemic form, cerebrospinal 
meningitis sometimes occurs in over¬ 
crowded, unsanitary surroundings. 
Epidemics in schools are much less 
frequent than generally believed. 

The onset of cerebrospinal men¬ 
ingitis is sudden, and has many 
characteristics of the common cold, 
such as chills, headaches, and pains 
in the neck and limbs, often ac¬ 
companied by vomiting and prostra¬ 
tion. Stiff neck is one of the most 
characteristic symptoms of cerebral 
meningitis. It develops within thirty- 
six hours and renders movement of 
the head extremely painful. The 
victim ordinarily will be sensitive to 
noise and light, and his face may be 
either pale or cyanotic. 

Fatalities from cerebrospinal men¬ 
ingitis have been greatly reduced by 
chemi- and bio-therapeutics, includ¬ 
ing sulfa drugs and penicillin. Thus, 
while still serious, it is no longer 
feared as it was in the past. The du¬ 
ration of cerebrospinal meningitis is 
variable, but recovery is now usually 
rapid. However, in some cases, con¬ 
sequences such as behavior changes, 
muscular weakness, and disturbances 
in vision and hearing may develop. 

Anyone who suspects that he has 
come in contact with an infected 
person should be examined by a phy¬ 
sician immediately so that sulfa and 


186 



CEREBRAL PALSY 


CEREBROSPINAL FLUID 


antibiotic treatment can be given, if 
necessary. See also meningitis. 

CEREBMAL PALSY, a long-term, 
nonfatal, neuromuscular disease of 
the central nervous system. It is 
usually caused by damage to the 
brain. Once injured, the brain does 
not heal without scar tissue and areas 
are destroyed and cannot function. 
Thus far cerebral palsy cannot be 
prevented or cured, but research in 
causes and prevention has progressed 
greatly, and much can now be done 
for the afflicted child if treatment 
and training are begun early. 

The crippling that results from 
cerebral palsy is a physical compli¬ 
cation, but its cause lies in the original 
brain damage, with different degrees 
of physical disability, impairment, 
and mental retardation. Spasms, lack 
of coordination, weakness, tremors, 
rigidity, and difficulty in seeing, hear¬ 
ing and speaking can be observed in 
the patient. 

While cerebral palsy is not synony¬ 
mous with mental deficiency, a large 
proportion of afflicted children, esti¬ 
mated at 50 to 70 per cent, are 
mentally retarded to some extent, and 
the disease is significant in an overall 
consideration of the problem of 
mental deficiency. The brain of the 
child with cerebral palsy may be 
damaged before birth or during in¬ 
fancy. Various factors may cause the 
brain damage, such as faulty brain¬ 
cell development of the child in the 
mother’s womb, disorders such as 
kidney disease, convulsions in the 
mother, incompatibility of the Rh- 


blood factors of mother and child, or 
childhood infections with accompany¬ 
ing high temperatures. 

Weight at birth seems to be in¬ 
volved in cerebral palsy incidence, 
because of more protracted and 
difficult labor. As older women 
generally have heavier babies and 
boys are frequently heavier at birth 
than girls, the disease occurs more 
frequently in male babies born to 
older mothers. The risks are particu¬ 
larly great during breech deliveries 
and in premature babies since the 
skull of a premature baby is so mobile 
that damage to the brain can easily 
occur. Since a greater number of 
premature babies now survive than 
formerly, the incidence of cerebral 
palsy is steadily increasing. 

Treatment varies according to the 
cause and severity of the disease. In 
mild cases, the child may receive 
muscle training and other special 
treatment and live a relatively normal 
life. Braces are employed to support 
weak muscles and prevent their 
shortening. Training in muscular 
movements, relaxation, and speech 
therapy are also essential. Any treat¬ 
ment of cerebral palsy requires great 
patience and must be supplemented 
by common-sense management of 
individual cases. See also birth in¬ 
juries. 

CEREBROSPINAL FLUID, a clear 
watery fluid, secreted by thre capillary 
blood vessels in the small cavities of 
the brain. It is contained in the space 
between the arachnoid membrane, 
the middle of the three membranes 
covering the brain and spinal cord, 


7^7 



CEREBRUM 


CERVIX 


and the pia mater, the vascular mem¬ 
brane enveloping them. The cere¬ 
brospinal fluid acts as a cushion for 
the brain and spinal cord, as well as 
a conveyer of the waste of metabo¬ 
lism. 

CEREBRUM, the frontal and upper 
part of the brain, consisting of two 
hemispheres or separate halves. The 
nerve endings believed to control 
thought and judgment are centered 
here. In human beings this organ is 
by far the largest part of the entire 
brain. Because of its vital functions, 
the word “cerebrum” is often used as 
a synonym for the brain itself. This 
term should not be confused with 
cerebellum, the smaller rear portion 
of the brain which governs muscular 
movements. See also brain. 

CERVIX, the entrance or mouth of 
the womb. It is situated deep within 
the female sexual passageway and re¬ 
sembles a small hollow cylinder about 
two inches long and one inch wide. 
Following ejaculation by the male, 
the spermatozoa travel through the 
canal of the cervix into the uterus 
and Fallopian tubes, where fertiliza¬ 
tion may take place should an ovum 
be present. During pregnancy, this 
canal is tightly closed by a thick plug 
of mucus which prevents infection 
from entering the womb. At the be¬ 
ginning of labor, this plug is dis¬ 
charged as the “bloody show” which 
heralds the onset of labor in most 
women. During labor, the opening 
in the cervix, normally the width of 
a pencil, is gradually stretched to per¬ 
mit the child to pass through. This is 
known as dilation and is accompanied 


by the familiar labor pains. After 
delivery, the cervix quickly shrinks to 
its normal dimensions. 

The cervix is one of the most 
significant tissues in a woman’s body. 
It may be affected by infections, in¬ 
flammations, or cancer. Fortunately 
the physician is able to see this tiny 
organ clearly with the aid of a small 
instrument known as a speculum 
which separates the walls and tissues 
of the vagina. Early treatment of 
disorders of the cervix is always 
essential. 

Infections of the glands within the 
cervix are especially common after 
childbirth. Symptoms include profuse 
irritating discharge from the vagina 
and occasionally oozing of blood, 
especially after sexual relations. These 
infections may be treated with vaginal 
creams and suppositories, by painless 
treatment in the doctor’s office, or 
with douches of prescribed medica¬ 
tions. Sometimes a badly infected 
cervix may require surgery or cauteri¬ 
zation. Cauterization involves burning 
away infected tissue with chemicals 
or electrical current. 

Raw areas, erosions, may occur 
after delivery, and cause oozing of 
blood and irritating discharge. Their 
treatment is similar to that of in¬ 
fections. Treatments should be con¬ 
tinued until the cervical infection or 
erosion is completely cured, for ma¬ 
lignancy may develop in later years 
unless infections are entirely eradi¬ 
cated. 

Fleshy warts which often grow on 
the cervix and sometimes cause bleed¬ 
ing are best removed by simple 
surgical measures. Cysts on the 


188 



CESARIAN SECTION 


CESARIAN SECTION 


cervix may provoke bleeding or 
watery discharge. Treatment varies 
and is usually performed in the 
doctor’s office. 

Cancer can occur on the cervix 
and constitutes one of the most 
common types of cancer affecting 
women, especially after forty. Symp¬ 
toms vary from none at all to bloody 
or irritating discharge. To verify his 
diagnosis, the doctor will take a 
small bit of suspicious tissue from 
the cervix for examination under 
the microscope. Should cancer be 


present, treatment includes complete 
surgical removal of all the internal 
female structures, and often the use 
of x-ray and radium. Only the doctor 
can decide which combination is 
best. Results in early cases are ex¬ 
cellent. For this reason, all women 
over thirty-five years of age should 
have an internal examination every 
six months. See also cancer. 

CESARIAN SECTION, the surgical 
operation by which childbirth is 
accomplished when normal delivery 



Cesarian Secfion — When the condition of the mother or size of the boby precludes 
delivery through the normal route, the physician does a cesarian section. A long slit is mode 
in the abdominal wall and the uterus, which holds the baby, is opened f/eW The large object 
at the top of the drawing is a retractor holding back the flaps of skin. The baby is delivered 
through the opening made in the obdominal wall (right) The surgeon holds the boby and 
carefully takes him out of the uterus. Cesarian section is done only when indicated because 
possibility of infection is high. 



CHAFING 


CHANCRE 


is either dangerous or impossible. 
Each year, approximately 150,000 
births occur in Ais manner, compris¬ 
ing 4 per cent of all deliveries. The 
operation was done in early times, 
and received its name from a law in 
the days of the Caesars stating that 
all pregnant women dying before 
giving birth be so delivered in hopes 
of saving the unborn child. Tradition 
has it that Julius Caesar was de¬ 
livered this way, but this is refuted 
by the fact that Caesar’s mother lived 
years after his birth. 

Formerly, because of uncontrolla¬ 
ble hemorrhage and infection, the 
operation was extremely hazardous, 
but today, in skilled hands, the risk 
is about the same as that in simple 
appendectomy. The technique of 
Cesarian section consists of entering 
by incision the abdomen and uterus 
in which the child develops during 
pregnancy. Once a woman has had 
one Cesarian section, future preg¬ 
nancies are usually delivered by this 
operation, but occasionally normal 
delivery is possible. See also preg¬ 
nancy AND PRENATAL CARE. 

CHAFING, the irritation which re¬ 
sults when two delicate skin surfaces 
persistently rub against each other, 
or when a foreign substance rubs the 
skin. The skin becomes red and pain¬ 
ful and is often raw and moist. Chaf¬ 
ing occurs most frequently under the 
armpits, in the groin, between the 
buttocks, below the breasts, in the 
folds of the skin, and also between 
the fingers and toes where it may be 
mistaken for a finger infection. Such 


an irritated area is a fertile place 
for germs or fungi. 

For simple chafing, the treatment 
may consist of drying the skin 
thoroughly after bathing and apply¬ 
ing a suitable dusting powder, zinc 
ointment, or cold cream, or one of 
the newer protective ointments. 
Cleanliness is important. Primarily 
essential, however, is the removal of 
the irritant which originally produced 
the lesion. This may mean more care¬ 
fully fitted shoes, a larger, looser gar¬ 
ment, or possibly a loss of weight. 
Sometimes a flat gauze bag filled with 
talcum powder and placed between 
the rubbing surfaces is soothing. See 
also ECZEMA. 

CHAGAS’ DISEASE, (American 
trypanosomiasis), a tropical ailment 
found prominently in South and 
Central America. It is transferred 
to man by parasites, in the excretions 
of a blood-sucking bug which usually 
bites the human lips. In the human 
body these flagellate protozoans 
change into intracellular forms which 
infest the cells of the brain and heart, 
and therefore the s}Tnptoms of 
Chagas’ disease resemble those of 
heart disease. Tissues are destroyed 
and the victim is incapacitated. A 
cure has not yet been found, and the 
fatality rate is high. Antibiotics have 
proved ineffective in Chagas’ disease. 

CHANCRE. The first visible symp¬ 
tom of syphilis is a sore, known as a 
chancre or hard chancre. The chancre 
usually develops from three to five 
weeks after exposure. It appears at 


190 



CHANCiOID 


CHAPPED SKiN 


the point where the spirochete has 
entered the body, which is ordinarity 
on the genital organs. Since it is 
possible, however, to contract syphilis 
without sexual contact, the chancre 
may occasionally appear in some 
other area, such as the mouth. If 
syphEis is treated in the primary, or 
chancre, stage, it can be cured with 
the use of antibiotics. 

The term soft chancre, also known 
as chancroid, designates an inflam¬ 
mation of the genitals caused by an 
entirely different microorganism from 
that responsible for syphilis. The soft 
chancre, a yellow sore, discharging 
pus, appears a day or so after ex¬ 
posure. Unless the person is confined 
to his bed, so that his movements 
can be restricted to a minimum, the 
soft chancre may become an abscess. 
Swelling may also develop in the 
glands of the groin. Chancroid yields 
readfly to treatment with proper hy¬ 
giene and the use of antiseptics. Since 
syphilis may be involved, a physician 
should always be consulted. See also 
chancroid; syphilis. 

CHANCROIDj, a lesion in which the 
chancre, or sore, is soft, in contrast 
with the syphilitic chancre which is 
hard. It involves the genitalia and is 
usually of venereal origin. Chancroid 
was a fairly common disease in 
ancient Rome and is mentioned by 
several Roman historians. Early 
English writers sometimes referred to 
the disease, calling it the ‘‘groyne 
bump*’ or “Winchester goose,” a 
name derived from the city of Win¬ 
chester, where the disease was ap¬ 


parently widespread, and from the 
awkward gooselike walk of the 

victim. 

The disease starts with an ache 
in the groin and inflamed glands. 
These swollen glands gradually gather 
into a painful poison-filled mass, 
called a bubo. Eventually the bubo 
bursts and the poison drains out. In 
many cases, the bubo remains open 
for weeks, and during this period 
the person may experience so much 
pain and discomfort that he is unable 
to walk. 

Chancroid is a disease of unclean¬ 
liness, and is most common in dirty 
poverty-stricken areas where hygienic 
conditions are almost impossible to 
maintain. Its incidence is high in sea¬ 
ports and cities and towns with large 
transient populations. 

Chancroid is caused by the strepto- 
bacillus of Ducrey and its incubation 
period is two to fourteen days after 
sexual intercourse. Treatment varies 
from washes and salves to caustics, 
electric cautery, and surgery. Sul¬ 
fonamides are now an effective treat¬ 
ment, and antibiotics like strepto¬ 
mycin have also been successfully 
used. 

CHAPPED SKM, a roughened, red¬ 
dened, irritable condition caused by 
loss of the natural oils in the skin. 
It occurs especially when the air is 
dry or when the skin is exposed to 
irritants such as cold hard water and 
harsh soap. Some persons are par¬ 
ticularly susceptible to chapping be¬ 
cause their skin glands do not re¬ 
spond to climate changes. 


191 



CHEMOTHERAPY 


CHEST 


To prevent painful irritation of the 
skin, the use of soap and water during 
the winter months should be kept to 
a minimum. For personal use, mild 
oils may occasionally be used instead 
of soap and water, and fats in the 
skin replenished with cold creams, or 
lotions and creams, available in 
stores, which increase the moisture 
content of the skin. Rubber gloves or 
similar protective gloves may be used 
for household tasks. 

The use of harsh soaps should be 
avoided. Hard water may be softened 
with washing soda or borax. A soft 
towel should be used to dry the 
hands; never a hot fire or an electric 
air drier. Lips, especially vulnerable 
to chapping because their sensitive 
surface is frequently moistened, may 
develop ugly painful breaks in the 
skin which are easily infected. A pre¬ 
cautionary measure is to apply cold 
cream or petroleum jelly to the lips 
before going out into the cold. 
Chapped skin can be minimized if 
the home is properly heated, and 
overheat and excessive dryness 
avoided. A pan of water kept on the 
floor in each room will add moisture 
to the air through evaporation. 

Despite all precautions, some 
chapping of the skin will occasionally 
occur. When this happens, the 
affected area should be protected 
from infection just as a woimd is 
protected. Cracks in the skin may be 
treated with a mild ointment such 
as cold cream and then covered with 
clean gauze. If the irritation is pro¬ 
longed, a physician should be con¬ 
sulted. See also chilblains; frost¬ 
bite; SKIN. 


CHEMOTHERAPY, the prevention 
or treatment of certain infectious dis¬ 
eases by various chemical agents 
which act as antiseptics in the body 
or inhibit invading parasites without 
producing serious toxic effects on 
the patient. 

CHEST, or thorax, starts just above 
a dome-shaped muscle called the 
diaphragm, ends at the shoulder 
blades, the clavicles, and is sur¬ 
rounded by a cage of flexible bones, 
the thoracic cage. This cage is formed 
by twelve pairs of flat bones, the 
ribs, which are attached to twelve 
pairs of spinal vertebrae in the rear. 
The ribs curve frontward, the first 
seven pairs connecting to the breast¬ 
bone, the sternum, while each rib of 
the next three pairs is attached to the 
one immediately above by cartilage. 
The last two pairs of ribs are floating, 
or unattached, in front. In the chest 
cavity, slightly left of center, is the 
heart with blood vessels going to and 
from it, the lungs, the bronchi, 
bronchioles, and a section of the 
windpipe. The food pipe, the esopha¬ 
gus, which starts in the lower part 
of the neck, extends the entire 
length of the thorax, joining the 
stomach just below the diaphragm. 

Breathing is controlled partly by 
the chest muscles but chiefly by 
the diaphragm. When the diapluagm 
lowers, the space in the chest 
cavity increases. Pressure is con¬ 
sequently greater outside the thorax 
than inside, and air rushes into the 
lungs. This is inhalation. In effect, 
a partial vacuum is created by the 
movement of the diaphragm, so that 
when the diaphragm is raised, the 


192 



CHICKENPOX 


CH!GGERS 


space inside the thorax decreases. 
Pressure is then greater inside than 
outside, and gas and water vapor 
are pushed out of the lungs. This is 
exhalation. The diaphragm also sepa¬ 
rates the organs of the abdomen, 
such as the liver, pancreas, and 
duodenum, from the chest cavity. 

CHICKENPOX, one of the most 
common as well as one of the most 
acute contagious diseases of child¬ 
hood. It is characterized by a super¬ 
ficial eruption of flat transparent 
blisters which appear in successive 
crops on different parts of the body. 
Chickenpox develops most often in 
winter and spring, and the age group 
five to six is particularly susceptible. 
The condition is seldom seen in 
persons over twenty. 

Chickenpox is caused by a virus, 
and is medically known as varicella 
because its rash resembles the rash 
in mild cases of smallpox, or variola. 
The infection is spread in the air, 
from the patient’s nose, mouth, and 
blisters, and by contact. The con¬ 
tagious period is usually about four¬ 
teen days, starting about two days 
before the rash appears. One attack 
of chickenpox normally confers per¬ 
manent imunity. 

The infection usually begins with 
a slight fever, headache, listlessness, 
and loss of appetite. In a day or two, 
tiny red patches, about the size of a 
pinhead, appear on the back and 
chest. Within a few hours, blisters 
fiffed with clear liquid begin to de¬ 
velop in the center of the pocks, sur- 
roimded by a reddened area of skin, 
and continue to appear for three or 
four days. The rash may spread to 


the face, scalp, hands, and feet. The 
fluid turns yellow in a day or so, then 
a crust forms. The crust begins to 
peel off in the next five to twenty 
days. During this period, trouble¬ 
some itching develops, and the chief 
difficulty is to restrain the child from 
scratching and incurring further in¬ 
fection. 

Chickenpox is usually mild and 
does not require special treatment. If 
itching is severe, the doctor may pre¬ 
scribe a calamine lotion or some 
other drug to relieve it. The child’s 
fingernails should be cut short, and 
the fingertips and nails scrubbed 
often and thoroughly with soap, 
water, and alcohol. As long as fever 
is present and new blisters continue 
to appear, the child should be kept in 
bed and isolated, especially if other 
young children who have not had 
the disease are in the house. 

As with other virus diseases, body 
resistance is lowered, and the child 
should be protected against possible 
complications, especially secondary 
infection. The scabs should be kept 
clean and free from irritation, and 
should be allowed to loosen and fall 
off naturally. Forcible removal of 
crusts may leave permanent scars. 
Diet should be especially nourishing, 
to build up the body and encourage 
more rapid healing. 

CHIGGERS, the larvae, or yotmg, of 
certain types of mites. Depending 
for survival on other organisms, they 
frequently attach themselves to the 
skin of human beings. Although they 
do not actually burrow under the 
surface, they do introduce into the 
skin a substance which produces 

193 



CHiLBLAIIMS 


CHILD CARE 


severe itching. Red blotches develop 
oa the skio and are soon followed by 
blisters. 

Anyone who plans to enter a tropi¬ 
cal or wooded area should protect 
himself against this pest by sprm- 
kiieg flour of sulphur on Ms under¬ 
garments and stockings, or by rub¬ 
bing sulphur foam on the skin. 
Leggings are also a useful protection 
against cMggers. 

Those who encounter chiggers 
should wash the skin carefully with 
soap and water. This treatment is 
more effective if the lather is left on 
the skin about ten minutes. There¬ 
after one of the many anti-itch prepa¬ 
rations can be applied. This treat¬ 
ment will lessen the discomfort from 
itching until the lesions have gradu¬ 
ally healed. 

CHiLBLAINS, an inflammation of 
the skin and of the tissues under the 
skin caused by cold; appears most 
often on the toes, fingers, ears, or 
nose. 

The initial inflammation is fol¬ 
lowed by a burning or itching sensa¬ 
tion, after which the area ordinarily 
becomes swollen and dark red. This 
color, as well as the characteristic 
chilled feeling, is due to a reduced 
circulation of blood in the area. 

Those susceptible to chilblains 
should take protective measures 
Warm clothing and carefully fitted 
warm shoes and gloves should always 
be worn during the winter months. 
Regular and vigorous exercise, such 
as walking and skating, is also ad¬ 
visable. Vulnerable areas of the body 
should be briskly massaged every day 


to encourage circulation of the blood. 
Regular doses of cod liver oil, as 
well as a healthful diet, are helpful, 
and general good health should be 

maintained. 

Treatment of chilblains often in¬ 
cludes painting the inflamed areas 
with a tincture of iodine. Zinc oint¬ 
ment is also beneficial. If blisters 
form, every effort should be exerted 
to prevent them from bursting, since 
healing is likely to be slow because 
of the condition of the affected area. 
If they do break, a stimulating oint¬ 
ment should be applied. A lotion 
composed of hydrogen peroxide and 
warm water in equal parts is useful 
for washing the sores, especially if 
they are discharging pus. See also 
FROSTBITE. 

CHILDBIRTH. See pregnancy and 

PRENATAL CARE. 

CHILD CARE 

Many parents are bewildered by 
the responsibilities implied m the ar¬ 
rival of a new baby. They feel that 
they have before them a highly 
scientific task with which they, in 
their ignorance, will be unable to 
cope This attitude is erroneous and 
should be discarded. There are facts 
about child care that should be 
known, but if parents use common 
sense and are really fond of their 
child they will not make serious 
mistakes. 

In the 1920s, pediatricians had 
their information neatly packeted in 
concise crisp form and parents were 
told exactly what to do for their 
babies in each situation. More re- 


194 



CHILD CARE 


CHILD CARE 


cently, however, pediatricians have 
discovered that babies cannot be 
treated in this rigid fashion. Just as 
babies are different from one another 
in size, hair color, eye color, and 
other characteristics, so are they dif¬ 
ferent from one another in their likes 
and dislikes, in their feelings and 
sleep habits, in their ways of grow¬ 
ing, in their dispositions. 

Babies should be treated as indi¬ 
viduals; no one else can understand 
the idiosyncrasies of a baby as well 
as the parents. The parents should 
not expect the doctor to tell them 
what to do in every conceivable 
situation. He will guide and instruct 
the parents from his wealth of ex¬ 
perience with babies in general, but 
they will have to apply what he tells 
them to their own baby. Parents 
must learn to rely on their own judg¬ 
ment not only because of the child’s 
individuality but also because it is 
only through this hard schooling that 
they really acquire the art of parent¬ 
hood. Theoretical knowledge and ex¬ 
pert advice cannot take the place of 
practical experience. 

Modern pediatrics has returned to 
a “naturalistic” attitude toward child 
care. The natural attitudes which 
grownups have assumed toward 
babies since the earliest days actually 
are the most desirable ones. It is 
good for the baby to be picked up 
from time to time, to be hugged and 
patted and rocked and sung to. In¬ 
deed, some pediatricians look to the 
time when the cradle will again have 
a place in the nursery. 

Bringing up a baby should be a 


pleasure. If it is not, something is 
wrong with the situation. Parents 
will not enjoy their baby if they are 
worried because he is not getting 
enough vitamins or minerals, or be¬ 
cause he has not been outdoors for 


Child Care — Expectant fathers are inter¬ 
ested in learning the correct ways to handle 
and care for the new baby. In special 
schools for expectant fathers instructfons are 
received and techniques practiced unfit 
mastered. Photograph shows an expectant 
father as he practices the correct placement 
of hands and correct position of baby for 
''burping^' after feeding. Dolls are used for 
demonstration purposes. 

Three Lions , Inc * 

several days, or because someone 
neglected to open a window in his 
room one night, or because he cried 
when a stranger approached, or be¬ 
cause he weighs less than a neigh¬ 
bor’s baby. Parents should learn to 
take it easy. If their baby is under a 

IQS 



CHILD CARE 


CHILD CARE 



Childf Care — An expecfanf father is learn¬ 
ing how to bathe and dry the baby while 
other fathers-to-be look on. The doll is 
quieter than a live infant, but it provides 
good practice in handling tiny humans. 

three Lions, Inc 

physician’s care, they can rest as¬ 
sured that he is getting an adequate 
diet Being indoors for a week or 
even longer will not hurt him; and, 
as tor the weight of a neighbor’s 
baby, it should be remembered that, 
within reasonable limits, there is no 
relation between health and happi¬ 
ness and body weight. Babies thrive 
best in a warm, atfectionate, orderly 
atmosphere. 

Structure and Growth. The aver¬ 
age infant weighs about seven pounds 
at birth, girls generally weighing 
about half a pound less than boys, 
and Negro babies often weighing 
more than white. It k not unusual 

196 


or abnormal for a child to weigh 
eight or even ten pounds. Babies bom 
weighing less than five and a half 
pounds are classified as premature, 
regardless of how long the pregnancy 
has lasted, and require special care. 
Most babies will double their birth 
weight at six months of age and tri¬ 
ple it at a year. 

Length at birth is generally be¬ 
tween nineteen and twenty-one 
inches and by the end of the first year 
the baby will have grown an ad¬ 
ditional ten inches. The baby’s head 
and chest circumference should be 
equal at birth. Thereafter, the head 
size grows rapidly, increasing two 
and a half inches in circumference 
by the end of the fir?t year. The 
bones of the skull are soft at birth 
and often the skuU. is misshapen from 
the effect of labor and may be 
molded right after delivery. An odd¬ 
shaped head should not cause alarm; 
within a few weeks the skull will 
assume a normal contour. Since the 
bones of the baby’s skull are soft 
and easily molded into an mcorrect 
shape, the infant should not lie in 
one position too long during the 
first year. He should lie on the left 
side after one feeding, on the right 
side after another, and be encouraged 
to sleep on both stomach and back. 
Fontanelles, the two soft spots in the 
skull, are places where the skull 
bones have not yet fused. The spot 
toward the back of the head usually 
fills in by the fourth month, and the 
spot in the front by the eighteenth 
month. Special care of the spots is 
not necessary, but they should not be 
disturbed. 


CHILD CARE 


CHILD CARE 


PROGRESS CHART 
One year 

Weight: boys 21.5 pounds; girls 
20 pounds 

Height: boys 29.5 inches, girls 
29 inches 

Teeth: six by end of the year 
Speech: Babbling; may say three 
to five words. 

Two years 

Weight: boys 28.4 pounds; girls 
27.8 pounds 

Height: boys 33.1 inches; girls 
32.7 inches 
Teeth: sixteen 

Speech: vocabulary of 100 to 500 
words; two-word sentences. 

Three years 

Weight: boys 33.5 pounds; girls 
31.5 pounds 

Height: boys 36 inches; girls 35.6 
inches 

Teeth: twenty 

Speech: 500 to 1500 words; uses 
pronouns. 

Four years 

Weight: boys 36.4 pounds; girls 

35.1 pounds 

Height: boys 38.6 inches; girls 
38.4 inches 

Teeth: twenty milk teeth 
Speech; makes complete sen¬ 
tences; 500 words added. 

Five years 

Weight; boys 41.4 pounds; girls 

40.2 pounds 

Height: boys 41.7 inches; girls 

41.3 inches 

Speech: articulation nearly per¬ 
fect; shows an interest in rhyming. 


Six years 

Weight: boys 45.1 pounds; girls 

43.6 pounds 

Height: boys 44 inches; girls 43.4 

inches 

Teeth: twenty-four, four of which 
are permanent 

Speech: articulation perfect; in- 



Chiid Care — Regular physical examina¬ 
tions are very Important in the baby's life# 
especially during the first year. The baby 
grows so quickly that changes must be care¬ 
fully watched. Regular check-ups are valu¬ 
able because indications of poor health or 
faulty nutrition are defected early. Photo¬ 
graph shows a healthy# happy baby under¬ 
going a complete examinotion. 


197 



CHILD CAKE 


CHILD CAKE 


flectioo of Eouns aad verbs almost 
perfect. 

Learning to walk. Some children 
will begin to creep about the seventh 
months while others sometimes wait 
until as late as the tenth or eleventh 
month. By the end of the first year 
the child should easily be able to pull 
himself into the standing position and 
to walk holding on to something. 
UsuaEy he can walk at about eleven 
montbs if someone holds Ms hand. 
Walking unaided usually starts at 
about twelve to sixteen months. 
Of course, some children progress 
faster than others, but about 40 per 
cent of children can walk at a year, 
and 67 per cent at fourteen months. 
Occasionally, if the child is fat or has 
been ill, he may not walk until the 
end of the second year. Sometimes a 
slippery floor or crowded play area, 
or ill-fitting shoes discourage the 
child from walking. Occasionally 
muscle disease, rickete, or nerve 
damage may be involved but this is 
rare. Parents should be patient with 
the child who is reluctant to start 
walking. Urging Mm to walk before 
he is ready can only make him in¬ 
secure. Letting the child play with 
other toddlers will encourage him to 
imitate them and try to walk himself. 

Seeing and Hearing, At birth, 
babies can distinguish between light 
and dark, but they are not able to 
fix their attention on any object until 
about two weeks of age when the 
eyes can focus on light. Usually, at 
four weeks, the child can look at 
something and at two months follow 
a moving object with his eyes. During 
the first few months, difficulty in 


focusing correctly the delicate eye 
muscles may cause the eyes to look 
crossed. Parents should not be 
alarmed since tMs difficulty normally 

disappears soon. 

Babies recognize noises and voices 
soon after birth, but are unable to 
distinguish specific sounds for two or 
three months. An infant of two or 
three months enjoys listening to 
music and often will stop crying if 
the radio or phonograph is turned 
on softly. 

Babies do not have a developed 
sense of taste as a rule and can usu¬ 
ally distinguish only between sweet 
and sour foods. 

The first six years. The most rapid 
growth period in a child’s life is the 
first four months. At one month, the 
baby will look at a person near by, 
hold objects placed in Ms hand. His 
eyes can follow a moving object and 
he can hold his chin up when lying 
on Ms stomach. Whether or not the 
child really smiles, or just has a gas 
bubble in Ms stomach, is difficult to 
say, but at two months he definitely 
smiles when he sees Ms parents and 
persons who give Mm attention or 
when he feels contented. The two- 
month-old baby will coo, hold up Ms 
chest when prone, and turn Ms head 
away from bright lights. He turns 
toward a spoken voice and sometimes 
is frightened by loud noises. 

At three months the baby can hold 
Ms head steady and may laugh. He 
can roll over, so it is not safe to 
leave him unprotected on an open 
bed. He gurgles and grasps objects. 
He may prefer Ms mother or who- 


198 



CHILD CARE 


CHILD CARE 


ever takes care of Mm to anyone 
else. 

A four-montli-old baby loves to 
study Ms hands, ingers, and objects 
around him. His attention is easily 
distracted by the world around him 
and feeding time may become a 
problem. 

By five months, the child wiU sit 
propped, and recognize and be afraid 
of strangers. He will begin to scratch 
and to put toys in his mouth. 

By the end of the sixth month, the 
child may sit briefly without support, 
reach for things he wants, and pound 
on furniture. He will probably love 
to watch himself in the minor, and 
will stretch Ms arms to go to his 
parents or those he likes. 

When he is seven to eight months, 
the baby will play peek-a-boo, pick 
up small objects, and often stand, if 
held. He may pull his mother’s hair, 
and can wave good-bye. 

In the last four months of the first 
year, the child will begin to recognize 
his own name and napaes of persons 
around him. He can open boxes, play 
with appropriate toys, walk alone or 
by holding on, notice other babies, 
and repeat simple words. 



Speech is a significant means of 

testing development of the chid. At 
the age of one year, a child can say 
a few simple words. 

Dr. Arnold Geseil, cMld psycholo¬ 
gist, states that at two years of age 
the chid should be able to fold pa¬ 
per, name familiar objects such as 
keys, pennies, and watches, listen to 
stories, look at pictures, and attempt 
to describe his own experiences. He 
will ask for things by their own 
names and begin to make sentences 
of about two to three words. 

According to the Stanford-Binet 



Child Care — The menfa! alertness and 
awareness of the baby can be measured 
Photograph shows a cube bemg held for¬ 
ward to test the prehensile and interest 
attitudes of the child. The baby's mental 
development as well as physical growth 
should be checked at frequent intervals. 

Three Lions/ Inc. 

Child Care — The head grows rapidly dur¬ 
ing the baby's first year of life. The cranial 
measurements are being taken as a part of 
an extremely careful and thorough check-up. 

Three LionSr Inc, 


199 





CHILD CARE 


CHILD CARE 


tests, at three years of age the child 
of average intelligence will be able 
to point out his mouth, nose, and 
eyes and repeat two numbers, but 
not consecutively. He will look at a 
picture and pick out four or five 
objects meaningful to him such as a 
boy, dog, tree, or car. Most children 
do these things quite easily, and 
failure to accomplish these simple 
tests may necessitate special training. 

At four, the child should know 
his sex, and be able to name three 
familiar objects shown to him, such 
as a spoon, book, and pencil, and to 
repeat three nonconsecutive num¬ 
bers. 

At SIX, the child should know 
whether it is noon or evening, and to 
define the use of a fork, chair, knife, 
or table. 

Crying. Physiologists recognize the 
value of crying for the new baby. 
Crying helps ventilate the baby’s 
lungs, forcing out old air and replac¬ 
ing it with fresh air. The thrashing 
about of arms and legs associated 
with crying helps develop the body 
musculature. Also crying is the only 
way a baby can indicate his needs, 
whether it be food, sleep, a change 
of diapers or love, to those around 
him. 

Most of the time a baby cries be¬ 
cause he is uncomfortable, and par¬ 
ents should check for wet or soiled 
diapers or an open safety pin. The 
child may be too hot or cold. Often 
crying may indicate fear or anger. A 
new baby enjoys being in command 
and if he learns that he can control 
adults by crying he will continue to 
do so. Always be sure when the baby 


cries that he is comfortable, dry, and 
has had enough to eat. 

Thumb sucking. Practically all 
babies, some more than others, suck 
their thumbs. In moderation, thumb 
sucking does not do any harm and 
interference with the eruption of 
teeth will ordinarily not happen un¬ 
less the habit continues past two 
years of age. Thumb sucking may 
indicate that the child is hungry or 
unhappy. It frequently occurs among 
babies who are weaned too soon, 
thus depriving them of the pleasura¬ 
ble satisfying practice of sucking. 
Artificial devices to prevent thumb 
sucking, such as arm splints or bitter 
preparations on the thumb, should 
not be used. It is better to try to 
find out the reason why the baby 
sucks his thumb. He may need more 
love and security. His hand should 
not be pulled out of his mouth, and 
the parents should avoid appearing 
upset about the habit. Ordinarily 
the child will discontinue sucking 
his thumb before the habit is pro¬ 
longed enough to harm him. 

Bed wetting. Children usually learn 
bladder control during the daytime 
some time during the end of the 
second year. Nighttime control may 
not occur until the third or even 
fourth year, but ordinarily it is ac¬ 
complished by the end of the third 
year. If persistent bed wetting con¬ 
tinues beyond four years of age, con¬ 
sult the doctor. 

Bed wetting may arise from emo¬ 
tional reasons, such as insecurity or 
jealousy of a new baby in the family. 
It can also occur if parents are too 
vigorous and rigid in insisting on 


200 



Hearing — A physicion is testing the baby's 
response to a ringtng sound. As unrespon¬ 
sive os they sometimes seem^ babies are 
nevertheless capable of showing a great 
variety of responses indicative of their 
ability to comprehend simple situations. 

Three Lrons, Inc 

lor — The baby's ears should be cleaned 
regularly. Photograph shows the correct 
technique for this operation. The movements 
should be gentle and the swab is never 
inserted deep into the canal. 

Three Lions, Inc 


Ear/ Nose and Throat -- The baby under¬ 
goes a thorough ear, nose and throat exam¬ 
ination Note that the doctor and nurse wear 
masks to prevent spreading germs Young 
babies are very susceptible to infections. 

Three Lions, Inc 


Nose and Throat — The physician exam¬ 
ines the baby's nose and throat carefully on 
every office visit Babies are especially sus¬ 
ceptible to respiratory infections. Every pre¬ 
caution should be taken to keep the baby 
from catching cold. 


Three Lions, Inc 



CHiLD CARE 


CHILD CARE 



Tfiiimb-siicking—Thumb or finger sucking 
can cause malocclusion which may result in 
facial disfigurement. To prevent irregular 
growth of teeth this habit should be stopped 
early. 

early toflet training. Best results are 
obtained if the parents are under¬ 
standing, patient, and do not push 
day or night toilet training and do 
not make a fuss about occasional ac¬ 
cidents. 

When the child is young, the blad¬ 
der empties automatically, without 
any control from the brain. Gradu¬ 
ally the brain becomes involved so 
that the child is able to control his 
urine when awake. Nighttime con¬ 
trol does not require much help from 


parents and if they are patient the 
child will eventually discipline him¬ 
self. 

In helping the child to keep dry at 
night, the following points should be 
remembered. (1) Water, milk, or 
other fluids should not be given to 
him after 5 P.M., unless he insists on 
a small drink to quench thirst. If the 
child complains of thirst at bedtime, 
or to delay going to bed, he may be 
given a piece of apple or orange. (2) 
Some parents awaken the child at 
ten o’clock to permit him to empty 
his bladder. If the child does not 
wake easily or has trouble going 
back to sleep, this practice should be 
avoided. (3) Protect the bed with a 
rubber sheet or have the child wear 
two diapers at night. (4) The child 
should be taken to the bathroom 
when he awakens. (5) The evening 
meal should be somewhat dry, and 
milk as a beverage or on cereals or 
puddings omitted. However, milk is, 
of course, to be given regularly 
throughout the day and used in foods 
when possible. 



Thumb-tucking-lf the Eones are soft and 
the habit persistent, the thumb may be de- 
formed by thumb-sucking. Photograph shows 
the difference in formation of thumbs in o 
patient who had the thumb-sucking habit 
during childhood. 


202 




CHILD CARE 


CHILD CAiE 


Bowel control Bowel control is 
easier to teach than bladder control. 
The following points will help the 
child ieam to control Ms bowels. (1) 
Do not begin bowel training until 
the child can sit comfortably by him¬ 
self 5 at about the age of eight or nine 
months, although some authorities 
suggest much later. (2) The child 
may be placed on the toilet two or 
three times during the day at about 
the time he usually moves his bowels. 
This may be following meals and 
just before bedtime. (3) Soiled dia¬ 
pers should be promptly changed. 
(4) Do not leave the child on the 
toilet seat for more than a few min¬ 
utes at a time, and do not permit 
the child to play with toys while on 
the seat. (5) Undue fuss should not 
be made over moving Ms bowels, or 
failing to do so. 

Many mothers, because of exces¬ 
sive modesty, teach the child all 
sorts of tricks to indicate that he 
wishes to go to the toilet. Often 
strange gestures and queer words are 
used. The child should leam from the 
beginning the commonly accepted 
words used for tMs normal function. 

Exercise, Babies need exercise as 
much as adults do, though often of a 
different kind. Kicking and moving 
about vigorously is really strenuous 
exercise for a baby and time should 
be allowed every day for unrestrained 
activity. All Ms clothes should be 
removed, the child placed on the bed 
or a thick blanket on the floor in a 
warm room and then permitted to 
kick and move about freely. Someone 
should play with the baby. 

Exercise is essential in all stages of 


cMldhood, but violent play is to be 
avoided, especially just before eating. 
Be sure the child is dressed suitably 
for the temperature with clothing 
that is loose and unconfining. 

Care should be taken in exercising 
the small baby not to push him into 
activity for which his body is not 
ready. The baby will indicate when 
his muscles are ready to perform 
such actions as sitting or standing. 
Playpens are good places for babies 
to leam to stand and move about 
without danger when they cannot be 
closely watched. 

Bathing the baby. Many hospitals 
today hold baby care classes for par¬ 
ents, either before or after the birth 
of the child, which include instruc¬ 
tions for bathing a baby. Most babies 
should not have a soap-and-water 
bath until the umbilical cord falls 
off. Until then their bodies are 
washed with cotton balls dipped in 
bland baby oil. The bath is given in 
a warm room with a temperature 
about 98®, and drafts guarded 
against. It should only take a few 
minutes, and afterward the baby 
should be dried thorougMy, but with¬ 
out vigorous rubbing, with an absorb¬ 
ent towel. If the cMld’s skin is ex¬ 
ceptionally delicate, a handful of 
table salt to a gallon of water helps 
to lessen irritation. As the child grows 
older, a warm bath just before bed¬ 
time may help promote more restful 
sleep. 

All the bath equipment and change 
of clothing should be assembled be¬ 
fore the child is undressed. The head 
and neck of the baby must be sup¬ 
ported during his bath. It is neither 

203 



CHILD CARE 


necessary nor advisable to wash the 
baby's mouth or dean his ears and 
nasal passages with a cotton-tipped 
stick* Any discharge from these areas 
should be reported to the family 
doctor* 

If the scalp develops a slight ir- 
ritatioiij overactivity of the sweat and 
fat glands may cause caking or 
“cradle cap/’ a type of dermatitis. 
This caking is caused by a mixture of 
fat and secretion with layers of skin 
and dirt. Warm oil or petroleum 
jeily rubbed on the scalp, which 
helps to soften this condition, fol¬ 
lowed by a Hand-soap shampoo will 
eradicate the difficulty. 

After the bath, powder may be 
used but it is not essentid. If used, 
care must be taken to keep the 
powder out of the child’s reach, and 
not to spray it about since irritation 
in the lungs can be caused if too 
much powder is inhaled. The use of 
oil on the baby’s body is also not 
necessary. 

Breast feeding. The best possible 
food for the infant is its mother’s 
milk, particularly during the earlier 
months of life. For unknown reasons, 
many women today are unsuccessful 
in nursing their babies, but fortu¬ 
nately many excellent substitutes are 
now commercially prepared which 
resemble mother’s milk. The new 
mother should not feel disturbed or 
guilty if she is unable to nurse her 
baby. 

Babies can derive benefit from 
breast feeding for about six months 
or even as long as nine months. When 
the baby cannot get at least half Ms 
food supply from Ms mother’s breast. 



Menfcil Growfii — What a child does wifh 
blocks is a good tesf of mental growth. 
Though monotonous to the adult observer, 
this girl's activities are everything one could 
desire of a child her age. Given a cup and a 
set of blocks, she will continue filling and 
emptying the cup endlessly until distracted. 

Three Lions, fnc. 

it is advisable to begin weaning. Most 
babies require weaning by the fourth 
to sixth month. 

All mothers should make every 
effort to breast feed their babies, 
since bi east-fed infants have a much 
lower incidence of infection, and 
seem to develop a little faster. In only 
rare instances does the milk of the 
mother fail to agree with the child. 
Occasionally diarrhea occurs if some 
element in the mother’s diet disagrees 
with the child, but this can easily be 
detected and corrected in most cases. 

Diet for nursing mothers, A com¬ 
mon belief persists that a mother who 
wants to produce sufficient good rich 
milk for her baby should eat plenti¬ 
fully, drink excessive amounts of 
milk, cocoa, or even beer. This is 
not true; many women who have 
done tMs have become unpleasantly 
fat, disgusted with nursing, and in- 




Mentfil Growfli — Photograph ilJusfrates 
the mental development of this child. Given 
a number of blocks, she will begin to pile 
them one on top of the other without further 
direction. She will not, at this age, build in 
two directions, but will continue piling them 
only in a vertical column. 

Three Lions, Inc. 


Mesifdl Growfli — Testing the baby's men¬ 
tal development. Fine motor movements per¬ 
mit precise grasp of the small pellet given 
this child. She is able to drop it into the 
flask without any trouble. Given two objects 
such as these, most any child of this age will 
proceed to use them in this way. 

Three Lions, Inc. 


dined to discontinue. Actually the 
diet for a nursing mother is little 
different from that of any healthy 
adult woman, with about an extra 
quart of fluid, half of which is whole 
milk, each day. The diet should be 
about 2500 to 3000 calories, which 
usually does not lead to any increase 
in the mother’s weight* The nursing 
mother should avoid taking sub¬ 
stances such as strong laxatives which 
deplete her body’s fluid resources, or 
stimulate the kidneys, such as exces¬ 
sive amounts of coffee or tea. 

The theory that a nursing mother 
should avoid gassy or sour foods such 
as cabbage, salads, and raw fruits is 
also without foundation, unless, of 
course, she herself is allergic to a 
particular food* Fried foods may be 
eaten when a woman is nursing, but 
it is best to avoid chocolate since 
many people are sensitive to it. The 


best flow of milk results from regular 
nursing of the baby because the suck¬ 
ing action actually stimulates the 
formation of milk in the mother. 

The diet of the nursing mother 
should contain about one quart of 
milk each day, some butter, four 
eggs a week, two green vegetables 
daily, and fresh fruit every morning, 
particularly oranges or tomatoes 
which are rich in vitamin C. Butter 
provides vitamins A and D; to pro¬ 
vide a full supply of these vitamins 
the mother may take cod liver oil as 
directed by her doctor. The milk 
drunk daily may be whole, or nonfat 
dry milk if she is overweight. If she 
doesn’t wish to drink milk, it may be 
used in food such as ice cream, cus¬ 
tards, or cocoa drinks. 

Mothers often worry about taking 
medicine, fearing that it will appear 
in the breast milk and harm the baby. 


20S 


CHILD CME 


CHILD CAiE 


Actually few drugs will do this, but 
if in doubt consult the doctor. 

Secretion of milk begins a few 
days after the baby is bom. In some 
cases, the breasts may leak fluid 
during the last few weeks of preg¬ 
nancy. During the first few days, the 
flow is usually scanty but becomes 
more profuse by the end of the first 
week if nursing is frequent and the 
child is hungry enough so that he 
sucks vigorously. The first secretion 
of milk is actually not milk, but a 
cheesy protein-rich substance known 
as colostrum which appears about 
the third day and is nourishing for 
the baby. Later the true milk begins 
and is pale bluish white in color, 
resembling skim milk. This color is 
normal and does not mean that the 
milk is weak. 

By the end of the first week, the 
average mother should have no dffi- 
culty secreting a pint of milk daily. 
This gradually increases and by the 
sixth month she is producing a quart 
of milk daily. The amount produced 
usually parallels the demands of the 
baby. Complete emptying of the 
breasts at nursing time is desirable to 
encourage good milk production. 
Nursing from both breasts at each 
feeding is recommended until maxi¬ 
mum production is established. Then 
alternate the breasts to avoid over¬ 
production. 

Mature milk which is secreted by 
the mother after the first month is 
about 87.5 per cent water, L25 per 
cent protein, 7.5 per cent sugar, and 
3.5 per cent fat Breast milk is con¬ 
siderably sweeter than cow*s milk, 
though somewhat lower in protein. 


It is also much more digestible and 
breast-fed babies are less apt to re¬ 
gurgitate or have gastrointestinal up¬ 
sets. Through the mother®s milk they 
also receive protective antibodies 
against disease which are not found 
in cow’s milk. If the mother’s diet is 
msufficient, the milk wiE be poor in 
quality. Vitamins should be taken 
by the nursing mother to enrich the 
mEk. 

Smoking does not affect the milk, 
and alcohol may be taken in modera¬ 
tion while the mother is nursing since 
it does not pass into the mEk except 
in small amounts. 

Hygiene during nursing. The nurs¬ 
ing mother should keep in good 
physical condition and eat properly, 
and allow for a good night’s sleep 
with a rest period in the midafter¬ 
noon and, if possible, before nursing 
periods. Worry and overfatigue are 
to be avoided. 

The size of the breasts does not 
seem to be linked to supply of mEk 
and women with smaller breasts 
often produce the most mEk. Deter¬ 
mining in advance whether or not a 
mother will be able to nurse her baby 
is not possible. Certain women 
should not nurse, however. These In¬ 
clude those women who are not in 
good health, those who have active 
tuberculosis or other infections, those 
who have had arduous labors, and 
those who have previously had tu¬ 
mors of the breast or breast infection. 
If the breasts become infected wMle 
nursing, it should be discontinued. 
Premature babies thrive on mother’s 
milk, but often their sucking power 
does not permit nursing. In some 


206 



CHILD CAIE 


CHILD CARE 


hospitals the mother’s milk is drawn 
off by a breast pump and then fed 
to the baby with an eye dropper or 
small tube until it is strong enough 
to nurse by itself. 

If the baby begins vomiting or 
fails to gain weight, the mother 
probably should stop nursing. How¬ 
ever, she should consult the doctor 
first. Failure to nurse one child need 
not imply that future attempts will 
be unsuccessful. 

Frequency of feeding. Babies are 
usually given their first feeding about 
twelve to twenty-four hours after 
birth. The feeding is started at about 
four-hour intervals. If the mother 
does not have milk, sugar-and-water 
solutions may be fed to the baby. 

Although opinion as to how often 
to feed the baby varies, most doctors 
seem to favor a three- or four-hour 
schedule. During the first few days it 
may be necessary to nurse the baby 
more often but the interval should 
not be less than two hours. In short 
time, most babies seem to wish to be 
fed every four hours and by the sixth 
week sleep through the night and 
do not wake up to be fed. Babies 
should never be awakened just to 
feed them unless their sleep pattern 
becomes set in such a way that the 
entire household is upset. One theory 
favors letting the baby get hungry 

Ciiiid Care — Permitting the child to sleep 
with the nursing bottle in the mouth may 
deform the face. Later in life facial dis¬ 
figurements are of great psychological Im¬ 
portance, Bad eating and sleeping habits 
which may cause deformity of the face or 
malocclusion should be interrupted os soon 
as possible Good care and dose supervision 
con prevent the development of these habits. 


before feeding Mm, since usually he 
will not only nurse more vigorously 
but also take more at each feeding 
Generally, after being fed, the baby 
will sleep for several hours. When he 
awakens he may be wet or need to 
expel gas and cry, which does not 
necessarily mean that he has not re¬ 
ceived enough to eat. 

Nursing should take place in a 
quiet surrounding. The mother 
should lie down on her bed or sit in 
another comfortable position during 
the feeding. Prolonged nursing is not 
desirable and may lead to irritation 
of the nipples and not more than ten 
or fifteen minutes should be allowed 
for nursing. Studies show that the 
food obtained after the first six to 
eight minutes is hardly sufficient to 
be significant. Breast-fed babies de¬ 
velop strong sucking powers and can 
empty the breast rapidly. Mothers 
should be sure to “burp” the baby 
about halfway through the feeding. 
Once the baby is on a regular feeding 
schedule, it is desirable to try to 
maintain it, except in unusual cases. 

Overfeeding and underfeeding. If 




CHILD CARE 


CHILD CARE 


the baby seems fretful after nursing 
and does not rest or sleep, the 
mother’s milk may be insufficient. 
In such cases, the doctor will pre¬ 
scribe a supplementary formula to 
be gi¥eG after the regular nursing 
period. 

Most babies stop nursing when 
they have had enough and seldom 
does a nursing baby overfeed. Oc¬ 
casionally, however, a baby getting 
too much milk too fast may vomit or 
regurgitate, or have an upset stomach 
afterward, but this is rare. If it does 
occur, the nursing time should be 
shortened. 

It is not advisable to weigh the 
baby before and after the feeding to 
see how much milk he gets; this is 
not only bothersome but may also 
disturb the mother unnecessarily. The 
behavior of the baby after the feed¬ 
ing is the best indication of whether 
or not he has received the proper 
amount. After nursing, hold the baby 
for a few minutes until he is ready to 
sleep. If he sleeps satisfactorily for 
two or three hours, he has had 
enough to eat. 

Cow*s milk. Generally the formula 
for babies is based on cow’s milk, 
which should be pasteurized to re¬ 
move harmful bacteria and pur¬ 
chased from a reliable dairy or 
market. In country homes where milk 
is obtained directly from cows, the 
milk must be boiled immediately 
after being drawn, then strained 
through cheesecloth into thoroughly 
boiled and sterilized bottles, cooled 
promptly, and placed in the refriger¬ 
ator. In cities, these precautions are 
not necessary since milk is produced 

208 


and pasteurized under the super¬ 
vision of a health department. Heat¬ 
ing milk does not remove any nu¬ 
tritional factors but does kill bacteria 
which may cause infections with 
streptococci or transmit tubercu¬ 
losis, typhoid, diphtheria, or scarlet 
fever. Heating also helps to increase 
the digestibility of cow’s milk. Be¬ 
cause the vitamin C in the milk, es¬ 
sential to the child, may be destroyed 
by heating, it is customary to begin 
giving the child diluted orange juice 
or vitamin drops at two weeks of age. 

Directions for feeding a baby with 
cow’s milk should be obtained from 
the doctor. Cow’s milk varies in com¬ 
position from human milk, but in 
the formula must simulate breast 
milk. Ordinarily the baby cannot di¬ 
gest plain cow’s milk until he is six 
months old and should receive it 
only upon suggestion and super¬ 
vision of the doctor. 

Preparing the baby's formula. 
When preparing the formula, all 
equipment needed should be washed 
thoroughly and boiled daily. The top 
of the bottle or can containing the 
milk must be washed with hot water 
and soap and rinsed thoroughly. Mix 
and measure the ingredients in steri¬ 
lized containers, wash and boil the 
bottles to contain the formula, and 
close with sterilized rubber nipples. 
Individual bottles for each feeding 
are preferable to one large bottle 
from which the milk is measured. 
To provide for accidents, such as 
breakage or contamination, make 
one extra bottle. It is usually easier 
to make the whole day’s supply in 
advance, preferably in the morning. 



CHILD CARE 


CHILD CAiE 


After the feedings are prepared, the 
fonnijla should be placed in the re¬ 
frigerator. Nipples should be made of 
thin rubber, washed and boiled daily, 
and rinsed after use to extend their 
life. 

Before feeding the baby, the 
mother should wash her hands well 
with soap and water. The bottle can 
be warmed by placing it in a pan of 
water on the stove. To test the tem¬ 
perature, shake a drop or two of the 
formula on the inside of the wrist. 
It is best to let a spray of imlk run 
out until the drops fall one by one. 
In some cases, the holes in the nip¬ 
ple may need to be enlarged, which 
can be done by heating a pin over 
a flame and plunging it into the top 
of the nipple. 

Cleanliness in the care of the 
baby’s feedings is essential when he is 
yoimg to protect him against serious 
infection. Sterilization is not essential 
after six to nine months, but the 
equipment should continue to be 
carefully cleaned before use. 

Changes in the formula should 
be made only on the advice of the 
doctor because the baby’s stomach 
and digestive system are extremely 
sensitive. If the baby seems healthy 
and continues to gain weight, there is 
ordinarily no need to change the 
formula. If he fails to gain weight, or 
if diarrhea or constipation occurs, 
the doctor may prescribe a new for¬ 
mula with m increase or decrease or 
adding or elimination of some in¬ 
gredient. 

A baby’s weight gain is not always 
continuous. If he drinks greedily and 
rapidly, cries for more, or gets fretful 


long before feeding time, he proba¬ 
bly needs more food. But the baby 
may be crying for other reasons and 
the mother should be sure that under¬ 
feeding is the reason before increas¬ 
ing his food, or overweight may oc¬ 
cur. At one time, fat babies were 
considered the healthiest babies but 
this idea has been disproved and in 
fact the opposite may be true. The 
baby should never be deliberately 
overfed. He can handle so much food 
a day and beyond Ms limit will be¬ 
come upset and nauseated. 

Water requirements. In relation to 
his weight, an infant needs about 
three times more water than an 
adult. His output of heat is greater 
and his body metabolism requires 
more water. Therefore, he occasion¬ 
ally ought to receive a bottle of luke¬ 
warm water. In winter, especially in 
dry apartments, he may awake fret¬ 
ful, with a dry throat, and need a few 
swallows of water to quench Ms 
thirst. The total fluid intake, includ¬ 
ing milk, water, and juice, of a grow¬ 
ing baby should be about three 
ounces per pound of Ms weight, and 
a little more in hot or dry climates. 

Feeding with spoon and cup. Food 
or a few drops of juice or formula on 
a spoon may be given to the infant 
when he is just a few weeks old. This 
will prepare him to use a spoon for 
solids later. At first he may appear to 
spit out the food because he cannot 
control Ms tongue. To prepare the 
baby for drinking from a cup, let 
him sip Ms daily orange juice from a 
small glass. Some babies do tMs 
easily, others find it difficult. By the 
sixth to ninth month, many babies 


209 



CHILD CARE 


CHILD CARE 


caa drink successfully from a cup. 
If, during the first few attempts, the 
baby shows any reluctance to drink 
from a cup, further attempts should 
be discontinued for a few weeks. 
Even if he cannot drink from a cup 
by one year, the parents should not 
be alarmed. He wEi team to do this 
by imitating those around him, and 
forcing will only disturb Mm. 

Solid foods. At the end of the first 
month, most babies can begin to take 
solid foods mixed with formula or 
water. The baby may begin with 
bran, rice, or oat cereal; avoid ce¬ 
reals containing wheat untE he is 
nine months old. The foods should 
be given in small amounts, thinned 
with formula or water so that the 
baby can swallow them more easEy. 
After the cereals are well established 
in his diet, vegetables are tried one 
by one, carrots, peas and string beans 
first. It is usually cheaper and more 
convenient to purchase the vegeta¬ 
bles already cooked and strained and 
ready to eat after a slight warming. 
At three months, the baby can begin 
to eat fruit; at four to five months, 
meat. When the baby is seven or 
eight months old, if he has teeth, he 
may begin on the junior foods, which 
are coarser and must be chewed 
slightly. They should not be given 
until the baby’s teeth appear and he 
is able to eat the food without fuss. 
A new food should be introduced in 
a small amount, only a teaspoonful, 
and then increased according to the 
baby’s appetite. A boEed potato may 
be given when the cMld is seven 
months old; crackers, zwieback, dried 
bread or toast added when the teeth 


appear. Substances eaten by the baby 
may appear in the bowel movements, 
and tMs should not cause alarm. By 
ten or eleven months, the baby may 
eat many of the easily digested foods 
that the rest of the family are served, 
if they are cut up or chopped. 

Schedule for the onc'-year-old 
child. When the child is a year old, 
he wEl be eating approximately as 
follows. 

Upon arising, he should have from 
7 to 8 ounces of mEk. About 8:30 
he receives breakfast of cereal, fruit 
and, if the doctor recommends it, 
egg yolk. 

At noon, the baby should have 
4 to 6 ounces of vegetable or meat 
broth, or one egg, or as a third possi¬ 
bility some scraped or chopped meat. 
To this may be added some white 
vegetables, such as 2 tablespoons of 
potato or rice, and from 2 to 4 table¬ 
spoons of a green vegetable, such as 
string beans, peas, or spinach. He 
may also drink more milk. 

In the evening, around six, he 
should have cereal and milk, and 
also a cracker or smaE piece of toast, 
and 1 or 2 tablespoons of cooked 
fruit, which has a slight laxative 
quality. 

Babies thrive best on a strict daEy 
schedule. Occasionally exceptions 
must and should be made in Ms daEy 
routine, but they should be kept to a 
minimum. 

Self-feeding. At the end of the 
first year, babies ordinarily show an 
interest in self-feeding and can pick 
up pieces of chrrot, potato, or toast. 
Actual self-feeding should be accom¬ 
plished by the end of the second 


210 



CHILD CARE 


CHILD CARE 


year* Rarely is there need to feed a 
child after this time. The child 
should eat a variety of foods at meal¬ 
time^ and the mother see to it that 
the diet is well-balanced and the 
food attractively prepared* The child 
should drink water several times 
between meals, but soft drinks and 
candies should be avoided. 

Most pediatricians recommend 
that food be given at regular intervals, 
and removed if not eaten in a rea¬ 
sonable time, about twenty minutes, 
and the child not given more food 
until the next regular meal. Coaxing 
the child to eat does little good and 
should be avoided. 

Cleanliness. The child should have 
a complete bath at least twice a week 
after the first year and preferably one 
every day, before bedtime. Washing 
the hands should be encouraged dur¬ 
ing the second year. The child, if he 
plays as he should, is likely to get 
dirty and disheveled. The mother 
should not badger the child to re¬ 
main clean, although it is wise if 
the mother teaches the child to clean 
up following play and meals. 

The young child’s hair should be 
shampooed about every three or four 
days, according to the season, and 
oils need not be used afterward. 

Cleanliness will become more 
habitual if it is made easy—^the 
soap and washstand within easy 
reach, the mirror low enough for 
the child to see himself, and the 
towel readily available. This does not 
mean that cMld-size bathrooms are 
necessary, but perhaps it might re¬ 
quire a steady fiorm stool or box on 
which the child can stand. It helps 


the child if one of Ms parents washes 
or brushes Ms teeth at the same time 
as the child, since children love to 
imitate and learn best tMs way. 

Feeding the older child. At one 
year of age, the child wil probably be 
able to eat some of the foods that 
the family is eating, unless he has an 
allergy to one of them or does not 
have enough teeth to chew Ms food 
well. Eggs should be taken easily in 
aU forms by one year. While egg yolk 
is started at six months, egg white 
should not be given until the end of 
the first year. 

Cod liver oil In the United States, 
cod liver oil or vitamin compounds in 
liquid form are practically universally 
given to children daily. Cod liver oil 
contains large amounts of vitamins 
A and D, which prevent or help cure 
rickets. In rickets, softening of the 
bones occurs due to failure of the 
body to use properly the mineral sub¬ 
stances calcium and phosphorus. 
Vitamin D is the essential material 
involved in utilization of these min¬ 
erals and so should be added to the 
diet in plain or mint-flavored cod 
liver oE, or through other vitamin 
preparations. Vitamin D is created by 
the body from exposure to sunshine 
in the summer, so most children do 
not need supplements at that time; 
but they are essential in the winter. 
At one time 50 to 80 per cent of 
chEdren developed rickets; their 
bones did not grow properly and 
their muscles were flabby. Now milk 
is often fortified with vitamin D and 
additional vitamins are also given. 
Cod liver oil in straight form is also 
prescribed by some doctors. 


211 



CHILD CAiE 


CHILD CAiE 


Sleep for the baby. Newborn 
babies with good digestion and good 
appetite, plus proper foods, will 
usually sleep about nine-tenths of the 
time. Gradually they require less 
sleep, so that by the age of six months 
they sleep only about fifteen hours a 
day; from then until they are six, 
about twelve hours; from seven to ten 
years, eleven hours a day; from eleven 
to fourteen years, ten hours a day. 
Nine hours of sleep are needed by 
older teen-agers. Up to six years, a 
child should also have a nap during 
the day, lasting from 45 minutes to 
an hour and a half. 

A baby should sleep in a room 
that is darkened and away from 
routine household noises. Hunger, 
pain, sudden noises, flashes of light, 
and sudden changes in temperature 
will awaken a small baby. The child 
will sleep soundly if he is warm, but 
not overly warm, well fed, and in a 
quiet darkened room. A baby often 
tends to wake up at a slight sound, 
and so the mother should not rush 
into his room every time he whim¬ 
pers, even at night. 

A baby should be put to bed at 
a reasonably early hour, usually 
around six o*clock, and not kept up 
late, unless for a good reason. Fre¬ 
quently an overtired child has dif¬ 
ficulty going to sleep and will be 
cranky and irritable the following 
day. 

The mattress on which a baby 
sleeps should be firm, but soft 
enough to be comfortable. The child 
should be lightly covered and his 
room comfortably warm, but not hot. 
In good weather, the window may be 


open enough to permit fresh air to 
circulate freely. Pillows are not neces¬ 
sary until the third year. 

In nice weather, naps may be 
taken out-of-doors as early as two 
weeks of age; in winter, not until six 
weeks. If it is inconvenient to put the 
baby outside, he can be placed in his 
carriage next to an open window, 
with the door of the room shut to 
avoid draft. In cold weather, cold 
cream applied to the baby’s face will 
protect its delicate skin. 

Clothing, Most mothers dress the 
baby too warmly, and as a result the 
child perspires excessively and may 
kick off his covers and then become 
chilled. There has been much dis¬ 
cussion whether or not a baby should 
wear cotton, wool, silk, rayon, or 
mixtures of these fabrics. Cotton is 
usually not warm, since it carries off 
heat rapidly. However, it can be 
easily boiled or sterilized and is use¬ 
ful for diapers and summer clothes. 

Because it conducts heat poorly, 
wool is a warm material, but it is 
somewhat irritating to the skin and 
is often difficult to launder. Wool 
must be washed with lukewarm water 
and mild soap since boiling or hot 
water and strong soap harden and 
otherwise harm its fibers. 

Silk is not a warm material and 
some babies are sensitive to it. Rayon, 
too, is not particularly warm and 
must be washed with some care* 

Sleeping bags. The sleeping bag is 
very useful for the baby. Correctly 
sized and constructed, it is loose 
enough to permit plenty of motion 
and warm enough to prevent loss 
of heat. Also, it cannot be kicked off 


212 



CHILD CARE 


CHILD CARE 


during sleep. Care must be taken that 
the sleeping bag fits loosely, particu¬ 
larly around the wrists and neck, 
and that it is long enough to permit 
the baby to stretch. Materials used 
may be sheeting, canton flannel, 
French flannel, or light blanketing, 
the choice depending upon the sea¬ 
son. 

Protective pants. Protective pants, 
made of various materials such as 
rubber, plastic, and rubberized silk, 
are a great convenience. To avoid 
skin irritation, they should be re¬ 
placed by dry ones when the baby’s 
diaper is changed. Washing immedi¬ 
ately prolongs the life of the pants. 
If the child has irritated buttocks, 
avoid continuous use of the pants. 
They should fit loosely around the 
legs and waist. The pants themselves 
do not cause irritation; nevertheless, 
they retain both the heat given ofi 
by the body and the urine, which 
may produce irritation. Protective 
pants save time and money by cutting 
down on the amount of diaper 
changes necessary; however, the 
mother must be careful not to leave 
them on too long without changing 
the diaper. 

Care of the baby in hot weather. 
In summer, babies require more 
fluids and should be offered plenty of 
water to drink. The need for solids 
diminishes and the baby may seem 
less hungry. Since fats produce heat, 
the baby’s diet should contain less 
fat than during the winter. 

In hot weather, if the baby vomits 
or has loose stools, all food must be 
stopped immediately and boiled 
skimmed milk substituted for the 


formula. If the symptoms cease, the 
formula may be given again in 
weakened amounts untU full strength 
is attained. When older children have 
stomach upsets, fluids—fuices, w^eak 
tea, skimmed milk, clear soup—only 
are to be given. 

During the summer, a baby can be 
clothed in very thin cotton under¬ 
clothes and diapers. He will need 
more clothing early in the morning 
and late in the afternoon. A cotton 
sunsuit is sufficient clothing for a hot 
day. The baby’s clothing should be a 
little lighter in hot weather than an 
adult’s. 

If the baby’s skin is moist in hot 
weather, he is probably wearing too 
many clothes; and if his lips, fingers, 
and toes are cold, he needs more 
clothing. 

Frequent baths are comforting to 
the baby in hot weather. The bath 
water should be tepid, not cold. One 
teaspoonful of baking soda to a pint 
of water soothes and helps cool the 
skin. After the bath, the baby may be 
powdered lightly. Cornstarch is as 
good as any other powder. 

Exposure to sun. Moderate ex¬ 
posure to the sun is not dangerous to 
the baby’s eyes or skin. In summer, 
the baby may take a nap in the 
sunlight in the morning or late in 
the afternoon, avoiding the extreme 
of heat at midday. Exposure to sun 
should be gradual, beginning with 
just a few minutes and increasing to 
about half an hour in direct exposure. 
A child may become ill or sunburned 
if exposure to sun is excessive. Vari¬ 
ous lotions are available which help 


213 



CHILD CARE 


CHILD CARE 


to prevent an excessive reaction to 
the sun. 

rraveling with the baby. Travel is 
not recommended or desirable for a 
very young baby. But short trips are 
often possible when the baby is 
slightly older and, if adequately 
planned in advance, can be done 
With a minimum of difficulty. 

Car beds are obtainable and can 
be placed in the back seat of an 
automobile or taken on a train, bus, 
plane, or ship. They provide a com¬ 
fortable resting or sleeping place for 
the baby. Extra diapers, fresh water, 
and canned formula or evaporated 
milk should be taken along in case 
of emergency. Refrigeration for the 
baby’s formula bottles is sometimes 
possible on trains and other public 
transportation. If refrigeration is not 
available, a thermos bottle is a handy 
container for juice, formula, and 
other drinks for the baby, or an ice 
container may be used to keep the 
drinks cold. 

Travel will be less taxing for the 
mother and child if it is done at a 
time when the roads or the trans¬ 
portation system is least congested. 

The child's teeth Development of 
teeth differs among children, as do 
the time of eruption and the reaction 
to teething. Even very heakhy chil¬ 
dren may become fretful, sleep 
poorly, and refuse meals during 
teething periods. Teething often 
causes drooling of saliva, and loose¬ 
ness of bowels and slight fever. The 
doctor should be consulted; he may 
prescribe some medication to ease the 
baby over the teething period. Erup¬ 
tion of the child’s teeth usually 

214 


proceeds as follows: the two central 
lower teeth during the sixth to ninth 
month; the four upper central teeth 
during the eighth to twelfth month; 
the other two lower central teeth and 
the four front double teeth during the 
twelfth to eighteenth month. Alto- 



child Care — The teeth must not be over¬ 
looked in child core. Many dental diseases 
can be prevented if the child is brought to 
the dentist regularly even though dental 
attention seems unnecessary. The first set of 
teeth ore called deciduous^ commonly known 
os milk teeth or baby teeth. These teeth are 
twenty in number and are smaller than the 
second set of teeth. Photograph shows the 
upper and lower jaws of a set of deciduous 
teeth. Upper jaw; (1) central incisor, (2) lat¬ 
eral incisor, (3) cuspid, (4) first molar, and 
( 5 ) second molar, lower jaw: (5) second 
molar, ( 4 ) first molar, (3) cuspid, (2) lateral 
incisor, and (1) central incisor. 





Child Care — Regular trips to visit the den¬ 
tist are a pleasure for this child. He enjoys 
the kind attention and is interested in all 
the instruments and equipment. A healthy 
attitude toward good care of his teeth is 
being developed early. 



CHILD CARE 

gather twenty teeth are in the first 
set. Most children have six by the 
end of the first year, although it is not 
unusual for a child not to have any 
teeth the first year* The rest of the 
teeth come between the eighteenth 
and twenty-fourth month, except the 
four back double teeth, which usually 
appear between the twenty-fourth and 
thirtieth month, but may come even 
later. 

Because the teeth begin to form be¬ 
fore the child is bom, the pregnant 
woman’s diet should be nutritionally 
adequate, including sufficient vita¬ 
mins, minerals, especially calcium 
which is found in milk, and fresh 
vegetables, eggs, cooked fruits, 
cereals. Calcium supplements are 
often recommended. 

To build healthy teeth, adequate 
food materials are essential in the 
child’s diet, especially calcium and 
phosphorus, and the vitamins A, C, 
and D. The diet should include a 
sufficient quantity of milk each day, 
or its equivalent in butter or cheese, 
and eggs, leafy green vegetables, and 
fresh fruit. For growing babies, the 
diet is often supplemented by cod 
liver oil. Milk and cheese are the best 
source of calcium. Foods rich in 
vitamin A are eggs, butter, carrots, 
and other vegetables. Vitamin C is 
abundant in citrus fruits, and D is 
found in fortified milk, in cod liver 
oil, and in most vitamin preparations. 

Many physicians feel that coarse 
foods strengthen the jaws and help 
to harden the gums. When a new 
tooth is coming in, coarse foods serve 
as a resistance against which the gums 
may work to permit the teeth to cut 


their way through, Heredity is also 
significant in determining the type 
and quality of the child’s teeth. 

Special mouth care is not essential 
during the first two years. Some time 
in the beginning of the third year the 
child may be shown how to use a 
toothbrush by having him imitate the 
actions of the older person. During 
his third year the child should see a 
dentist, who will note any difficulties 
and plan for future care. 

The sick child. Since children are 
not as articulate in drawing attention 
to their needs as adults, most 
mothers soon learn how to detect 
the first signs of illness. The child 
who is listless, drowsy for no apparent 
reason, flushed, and breathing with 
difficulty is obviously in need of 
medical attention. A child who looks 
and acts well and has plenty of 
energy probably is well. The child 
should get regular checkups at fre¬ 
quent intervals during the first two 
years, and after that twice a year. 
Most communities have public health 


215 


CHILD CARE 


CHILD CARE 



Exercise 2 — The baby is laid on his back 
with his feet toward the mother. The mother 
theri grasps both feet and gently resists any 
movements that the baby may make. This 
resistance usually stimulates the boby to 
kick all the more. The exercise should be 
continued one or two minutes. It serves to 
strengthen the leg muscles. 


Baby Exercise 1 - The baby Is fold on his 
back with his feet toward the mother. The 
mother then grasps the baby's hands and 
pulls him toward her. The exercise should be 
repeated two or three times. The baby fries 
to help himself up, which strengthens the 
arm, shoulder, neck, and abdominal muscles. 



services where a child may receive a 
checkup without charge if a private 
pediatrician cannot be consulted. 
Medicine should never be given to a 
child unless ordered by a physician. 
Unused portions of medicine should 
always be destroyed after the illness 
for which they were prescribed has 
been cured. If, months after an ill¬ 
ness, the child develops what seems 
to be the **same” condition, under no 
circumstances should he be given the 
original prescription unless ordered 
by a doctor. 

The child in the hospital If a 


child must be hospitalized, for an 
operation or a protracted stay, there 
are a number of things to know and 
to be done which can help the child 
through the experience. The child 
should be intelligently prepared for 
Ws stay in the hospital. Coriidence in 
the doctors and nurses should be 
established by suitable explanations; 
visits to the child planned as periods 
of happiness rather than of worry. 
The child will reflect his parents’ 
attitudes so it is important that they 
appear hopeful, confident, and en¬ 
couraging throughout the entire ex- 



CHILD CARE 


CHILD CARE 



Exercise 4 — The baby is laid on his back 
with his feet toward the mother. The legs are 
grasped by the mother midway between the 
knees and the ankles. The legs then are 
raised until body and legs are almost ver¬ 
tical, with only the baby's head and upper 
part of the shoulders on the fable. The baby 
then is returned to his original position. The 
exercise should be repeated two or three 
times, ft tends to strengthen the trunk and 
spina! muscles. 

perience. The homecoming should 
also be carefully planned. 

Prevention of infection. Some dis¬ 
eases can be prevented by inocula¬ 
tion or vaccination, including small¬ 
pox, diphtheria, whooping cough, 
scarlet fever, measles, typhoid fever, 
tetanus, and poliomyelitis. 

Although smallpox is rare nowa¬ 
days, every child should be vaccinated 
against it, and in most parts of the 
country this is mandatory before the 
child can be admitted to school. The 
chEd may be vaccinated when he is 
from three to six months of age. 


Exercise 3 — The baby Is laid on his bock 
with his feet toward the mother. The baby's 
legs are raised and the calves grasped near 
the ankle. The feet are brought toward the 
child's nose with knees straight and thighs 
in contact with the obdomen. This exercise 
should be repeated three or four times. It 
tends to strengthen both leg and abdominal 
muscles. 



Ordinarily vaccination is not done 
during the summer months, and it 
should be postponed if the child is 
not well or if other children in the 
family have infectious diseases. 

Vaccination is best performed on 
the outer side of the upper arm. 
Although many parents of baby girls 
demand vaccination on the thigh, this 
is not always a safe technique be¬ 
cause of difficulty in keeping the area 
clean and free of infection. 

Usually, after a week, a small 
pimple forms at the site of the vac¬ 
cination and in a few days the area 


217 



CHILD CARE 


CHILD CARE 


around the vaccination may swell and 
become Mack and blue. This is the 
normal process of a vaccination and 
should not cause alarm. The vac¬ 
cination must be kept dry until the 
crust fails off. To prevent scratching 
the area^ the child may wear a long- 
sleeved shirt day and night. Occa- 
sionaEy the vaccination will not 
''take,” and must be repeated. Small¬ 
pox vaccination is usually repeated 
at age six, just before the child 
enters school, and again at the age 
of twelve- 

For protection against diphtheria, 
toxoid is given in three doses, once 
a month, starting at the age of three 
months. Booster injections should be 
given at eighteen months and again at 
the age of three or four. Whooping 
cough vaccination is usually given at 
the same time. 

Polio vaccination should be given 
when the child is six months old, 
repeated two weeks to a month later 
and again in about six months. 
Inoculations against other illnesses, 
such as measles, scarlet fever, and 
typhoid fever, can be given as the 
need arises according to the phy¬ 
sician’s judgment of the individual 
case. 

Hygiene for the sick child. If the 
child h^ an infectious disease, all 
unnecessaiy draperies, carpets, pic¬ 
tures, and other articles such as books 
and toys should be removed from the 
sickroom before the child is put into 
it. Occasionally, in a serious illness, 
objects with which the child has been 
in contact must be destroyed. Hard¬ 
wood or metal pieces of furniture are 
preferable for the sickroom rather 


than stuffed furniture, because they 
are easier to clean. When possible, 
the cMld’s room should be near the 
bathroom to lessen the amount of 

work. 

The person who cares for a child 
with an infectious disease should 
wear a washable smock over her 
clothing. She should also wear a cloth 
mask and wash her hands thoroughly 
after leaving the child. 

A large paper bag is useful at the 
side of the sick child’s bed. In this 
can be placed soiled towels, used 
gauze, cotton, and other sickroom 
items. The entire bag and its contents 
can then be conveniently disposed of 
daily. If the infection is contagious, 
it is best to bum the waste. 

The sick child should be dressed in 
a loose-fitting, easily washable gar¬ 
ment and the room should be well 
ventilated, although free from un¬ 
usually cold drafts. Bathing the sick 
child is preferably done by a careful 
sponge bath rather than immersion in 
a tub. After the sponge bath, the 
child may receive an alcohol rub, or, 
if he is too young for this, talcum or 
cornstarch may be patted over his 
body. If the child has much fever, 
cold cream or petroleum jelly applied 
to the lips helps to overcome dryness 
and crusting. 

Fever. A fever usually indicates 
that the child is El, although occa¬ 
sionally a slight variation in tempera¬ 
ture is not a sign of illness. Every 
parent should know how to read a 
thermometer and both rectal and oral 
thermometers should be on hand in 
the medicine chest. A small chEd’s 
temperature is best taken with a 
rectal thermometer. The normal 


218 



CHILD CARE 


CHILD CAiE 


range is between 99® and 100® when 
taken rectally (usually one degree 
higher than an oral temperature). To 
be certain of a correct reading, the 
thermometer must be shaken down 
well and left in position for three to 
five minutes. After use, it should be 
washed in lukewarm, not hot, water, 
rinsed with alcohol if possible, dried, 
and put away in a safe place. 

A variety of disorders may cause 
elevations of temperature in children. 
Simplest and most common is the 
ordinary cold, which may give a 
high temperature. A sore throat, 
stomach upset, or infection will cause 
fever, as will the onset of the common 
childhood diseases, scarlet fever, 
measles, whooping cough, or chicken- 
pox. When the temperature is above 
normal, the doctor should be con¬ 
sulted and no home treatment, such 
as laxatives or enemas, should be 
given until they are prescribed. 

Many feverish babies feel better 
after a sponge bath with lukewarm 
water. Ice-cold rub-downs or alcohol 
should not be given to babies under 
two years of age. Occasionally the 
doctor may order a cool-water enema 
for a high temperature, or prescribe 
a small dose of aspirin. These treat¬ 
ments are soothing, but usually do 
not cure the cause of the rise in 
temperature. The doctor should al¬ 
ways be consulted about what to feed 
the sick child. In most instances a 
poor appetite follows a high temper¬ 
ature and parents should not force 
the child to eat. Fluids may be en¬ 
couraged, but solids are to be avoided 
during the first few days of the illness. 

The common cold. The most fre¬ 
quent illness in babies is the common 


cold. It is usually not serious, even 
when the temperature is elevated, but 
because of the danger of the cold's 
developing complications such as 
pneumonia, bronchitis, or ear in¬ 
fection, the doctor should be called 
promptly. The best way to avoid 
contracting colds is to avoid exposure 
to persons with colds. Other factors, 
such as chilling, poor nutrition, and 
fatigue are probably also significant 
in making the child more prone to the 
cold. The child with a cold is more 
comfortable in a moist environment. 
This does not mean a damp room, 
but rather a properly humidified 
room. 

Enlarged tonsils and adenoids seem 
to make children more susceptible to 
sore throat. If the tonsils are found 
to be infected, the doctor should de¬ 
cide whether or not they should be 
removed. 

Babies may have tub baths in 
winter, but the room in which it is 
given should be warm and free from 
drafts. A brisk, gentle rub-down 
afterward is also helpful. Preferably 
the bath is given at night, just before 
the baby goes to bed. 

Use of vaccines to prevent colds is 
as yet not established as effective. 
Nose drops may be prescribed to clear 
the nasal passages and permit easier 
respiration. At the first sign of a cold 
with nasal drip, cough, or rise of 
temperature, the child should be put 
to bed, and his food intake lessened. 
If the child runs a fever, of more 
than 102'", the doctor should be 
called. 

Hernia, Frequently a child is born 
with a weak spot in the muscles of 
the belly wall or groin. This con- 


219 



CHILD CARE 


CHILD CARE 


dition is commonly knowa as a 
mptere or hernia. Swelling is caused 
when the intestines or other tissues 
are pushed through the weak spot in 
the wail. Often the spot appears 
around the navel in newborn babies. 
When the child coughs, cries, or 
strains, the rupture is seen more 
easily because of the increased pres¬ 
sure within the abdominal cavity. 
Usually the lump disappears on lying 
down. Operation is not immediately 
necessary in these instances and often 
the doctor may just tape the navel 
hernia for a few months in the hope 
that scar tissue will seal over the 
defect. Hernias in the groin are less 
likely to disappear without surgery. 

Tonsils and adenoids* Apparently 
tonsils serve to take care of infectious 
germs. The tonsils frequently become 
inflamed, swollen, and infected in 
children, and may cause pain on 
swallowing, earache, difficulty in 
hearing, breathing, or talking, and 
high temperature. The organism 
which causes most tonsillitis, the 
streptococcus, is similar to the organ¬ 
ism that leads to rheumatic fever, 
erysipelas, scarlet fever, and other 
disorders. Penicillin is effective in 
curing tonsillitis in most cases and re¬ 
moval is not always necessary unless 
sore throats are particularly recurrent 
or resistant to penicillin, or the tonsils 
are enlarged. 

The child with tonsillitis should re¬ 
main in bed. If he is able to gargle, 
salt water wiE help to shrink the 
throat tissues. An ice coflar and 
aspirin may give relief of pain. The 
doctor may use injections of penicE- 
lin or piEs to help cure the infection. 


or he may prescribe other medicines 
such as Terramycin, Achromycin, or 
one of the other antibiotics. These 
drugs must never be administered 
without a doctor's orders. Because of 
the serious nature of complications 
from neglected tonsillitis, the doctor 
should be consulted if the parents 
suspect the chEd has a sore throat. 

The adenoids lie in the cavity be¬ 
hind the nose. Like the tonsils, they 
are prone to infections. When they 
are enlarged or infected, breathing 
and talking is difficult and the chEd’s 
voice has a nasal twang. Typically he 
keeps his mouth open at aE times. 
EventuaEy this may even lead to a 
change in facial expression; the upper 
lip is shortened and turned out, the 
Eps are thickened, and a line between 
the cheeks and lips is formed as a 
result of the narrowing of the dental 
arch of the upper jaw. 

Infections of the ear may follow 
adenoid infection and, if neglected, 
can lead to permanent deafness. En¬ 
larged adenoids should be removed; 
this may be done at any age. UsuaEy 
further trouble wiE not be encoun¬ 
tered after tonsEs and adenoids are 
removed, but in 10 to 15 per cent 
of cases they grow back and a second 
operation may be required. 

Care of the ears* The ears do not 
require special care. Syringes should 
not be used to wash out the ears, nor 
should cotton-tipped sticks be em¬ 
ployed to remove wax or other ob¬ 
jects. When a smaE chEd has a pain 
in his ear, he wiE usuaEy indicate his 
discomfort by putting his hand to his 
ear or by crying when the ear is 
touched. Infections of the ear fre- 


220 



CHILD CAiE 


CHILD CARE 


quentiy follow infectious conditions 
in the nose or throat and acute in¬ 
fectious diseaseso 

When the doctor examines the 
child with a painful ear, he routinely 
takes the temperature, which is 
usually quite high, even in simple 
ear infections. Next he will look di¬ 
rectly into the ear canal with a special 
instrument, the otoscope. If infection 
is present, and the condition war¬ 
rants, the doctor may make a small 
opening in the eardrum to release 
accumulations of fluid or pus. Other¬ 
wise, simple antibiotic treatment may 
be all that is required. Relief of pain 
is usually prompt following drainage 
or other therapy. Sometimes the pain 
of earache may be relieved by ear 
drops prescribed by the physician. 
Such treatment should not be used 
unless a doctor has seen the child. 

Before the introduction of penicil¬ 
lin, ear infections often caused more 
or less permanent deafness. Mastoid 
infection too was frequent. In mastoid 
infection, severe pain and tenderness 
are noted in the mastoid bone which 
is just behind the ear. Opening the 
mastoid bone to free it of accumu¬ 
lated pus, the so-called mastoidec¬ 
tomy, was a common operation in 
children twenty-five years ago, but 
is relatively rare today. 

Puncture of the eardrum by the 
doctor to release pus is not a dan¬ 
gerous procedure. If it is done early, 
hearing will not be impaired because 
the eardrum will heal promptly and 
hearing be as good as before. Punc¬ 
ture of the eardrum is far less dan¬ 
gerous than postponing the operation 
too long. 


Cuts and bruises. Little children 
frequently suffer cuts, bruises, burns, 
and similar injuries to the skin which 
can possibly become infected. In such 
instances, first aid given at home is 
of the greatest significance in prevent¬ 
ing complications from simple in¬ 
juries. Many different antiseptic sub¬ 
stances are available to Ml! germs 
located on the skin around a skin 
injury. The area affected should be 
washed immediately with plenty of 
soap and water. A suitable antiseptic 
may then be applied, but a clean cut 
usually requires only a finger-bandage 
such as the Band-Aid. Children often 
object to iodine solutions or alcohol 
because of the burning sensation, and 
other non-burning antiseptics may be 
used. 

Occasionally a bruise to the finger¬ 
tips may result in a painful swollen 
area of blood clot under the nail. 
The doctor should be called. Most 
likely he will make a small nick in 
the nail to permit free drainage and 
relief from pain. This should never 
be done by anyone but a physician. 
Bruises which are painful often can 
be relieved from pain by cold com¬ 
presses. 

Convulsions in babies. Babies have 
convulsions much more frequently 
than adults. The nervous system of 
a baby is so sensitive that frequently 
an infectious disease or high tem¬ 
perature will give rise to a convulsion 
or extensive shaking. In ordinary 
convulsions, the child loses con¬ 
sciousness and becomes rigid. Then 
there may be a spasmodic jerking of 
the face'and of the arms and legs. 
It may be difficult for the parent to 


221 



CHILL 


CHLOROFOiM 


differeatiate between a simple con- 
vnlsion and one due to epilepsy. In 
only about one-fiftli of convulsions in 
cMldren is the cause epilepsy. Con¬ 
vulsions should be promptly reported 
to the doctor. During a convulsion, 
the child should be placed gently on 
his side. Usually the child will sleep 
following a convulsion. 

See also bed wetting; colic; eye; 

FEEDING, breast; HEAD BANGING, 
HEAD rolling; IMMUNIZATION; 
THUMB SUCKING. 

CIHLLj a sensation of cold, ac¬ 
companied by shivering and usually 
with teeth chattering, throbbing, and 
trembling. It is frequently a promi¬ 
nent early symptom of acute in¬ 
fection. Any severe chill during a 
fever is a danger signal and a doctor 
should be called at once. 

A chill results from an increase in 
the chemical activity going on in 
the body and therefore a rapid rise 
in the production of heat by the body. 
The ultimate result of a chill is in¬ 
creased body temperature. A person 
with a chill is usually quiet, lies 
doubled up, has a pale cool skin 
and sometimes *‘goose flesh,” due to 
the constriction of the superficial 
Mood vessels under the skin which is 
sometimes so great that the skin 
appears Mue. A mild chill can usually 
be controlled to some degree by the 
person; however, a severe chill can¬ 
not. Warm blankets and clothing, hot 
drinks, hot-water bottles, and electric 
pads will help relieve the discomfort 
of the person with chills. 

A chill can be induced in patients 
by injecting certain nonspecific pro¬ 


tein substances. It can also be pre¬ 
vented by drugs which act as sedatives 
and as controls of body temperature. 
The action of these drugs, which are 
known as antipyretic and antifever 
drugs, is to depress the activity of 
the center in the brain which controls 
chills and shivering. 

The chill is being studied to gain 
further knowledge as to its cause 
and significance. Many physicians 
feel that a chill is often of real 
importance in helping to overcome a 
disease since it raises the body tem¬ 
perature through muscular move¬ 
ment. See also fever. 

CHMOFEACTIC, a therapeutic 
system based on the theory that the 
bones of the spinal column, by press¬ 
ing on the spinal nerves, cause an 
interruption of the normal function 
of the nerves. The result of this pres¬ 
sure is said to be eventual damage 
to the tissues. Extensive medical in¬ 
vestigation has failed to show any 
scientific foundation for this system. 
Chiropractors are nevertheless li¬ 
censed to practice in most states. 
Practically all chiropractors are in 
the United States. 

CHLOASMA. See liver spots. 

CHLOROFORM, trichloromethane, 
a heavy colorless liquid with a typical 
ether smell. Chloroform is best known 
as an anesthetic, and has been used 
for that purpose since 1847 when Dr. 
James Simpson, an Edinburgh gyne¬ 
cologist, dissatisfied with ether, dis¬ 
covered the narcotic qualities of 
chloroform. It became fashionable as 
an anesthetic in childbirth when 


222 



ROSIS 


CHOLERA 


Victoria permitted its ad- 
■ation during the delivery of 
^enth child. 

large quantities and habitual 
f cMoroform may result in 
ings injuries to the liver and 
s, a condition of transient 
inuria, albumin present in the 
and other diseases. See also 

3ESIA. 

^ROSISi a form of anemia, 
terized by a large reduction of 
;lobin in the blood, but with 
slight diminution in the num- 
' red cells. Some decades ago, 
sis, or ‘‘green sickness,’’ was 
on among girls and young 
a, but today it has almost com- 
' disappeared because of in- 
d knowledge of the place of 
n the diet. The symptoms of 
:on deficiency are a greenish 
to the skin, and menstrual and 
; disturbances. 

^ECYSTITISj the scientific 
for inflammation of the gall- 
jr. See also gallbladder. 

.ECYSTOGRAPHY, roentgen- 
ly, x-ray diagnosis, of the gall- 
jr after it has been made visual 
^stances not transparent to the 

Lstone attacks have character- 
symptoms, yet differences in 
I symptoms and severity of 
fften makes a definite distinc- 
om other diseases difficult. The 
action of cholecystography has 
I great advance in the diagnosis 
stones. 

./ELITHIASIS, a condition as¬ 


sociated with calculi, stones io the 
gallbladder or in a bile duct. See also 

GALLBLADDER. 

CHOLERA, an acute infection which 
chiefly involves the small intestine. 
The main symptoms are severe, 
constantly flowing diarrhea, vomit¬ 
ing, collapse, cramps in the muscles, 
and suppression of the flow of urine 
from the kidneys. 

Cholera spreads most rapidly in 
moist warm climates. From time 
immemorial it has existed in India, 
from where at one time it spread 
throughout the world, probably 
traveling along caravan routes into 
Europe and along water trade routes. 

The cause of cholera was described 
some fifty years ago by the German 
researcher, Robert Koch. A germ, 
the comma bacillus, gains entrance 
into the body through polluted drink¬ 
ing water. The organism then gets 
into the bowel where it causes acute 
infection. Cholera spreads in much 
the same way as typhoid fever does, 
the germs escaping from the body 
along with material that is vomited 
or passed from the bowel. 

To prevent the spread of cholera, 
the cholera patient must be isolated. 
Material that is passed from the 
patient must be destroyed by fire. 
Only food that has been cooked, and 
boiled, or preferably chlorinated, 
water should be used by people in an 
area where cholera exists. The food 
and water should not be permitted to 
stand for any length of time since 
they may become recontaminated. 
Those who live or travel in cholera- 
ridden areas can be partially pro¬ 
tected against this disease through 


223 



CHOLESTEROL 


CHOLESTEROL 


vaccinatioa with a serum made from 
the killed bodies of the specific chol¬ 
era germs. The incidence of cholera 
among inoculated people has been 
low. 

About five or six days after a 
person has been infected with chol- 
era^ a severe diarrhea begins, with 
violent purging, and eventually prac¬ 
tically pure mucus and water are 
passed. Then vomiting begins, fol¬ 
lowed by collapse. The skin loses 
its elasticity, the muscles cramp, the 
eyes are sunken, and the voice is 
feeble. As more and more water is 
lost, the thirst becomes intense, the 
pulse becomes rapid and weak, and 
the blood pressure falls. The face 
becomes sunken and the skin de¬ 
velops a blue, cyanotic tinge, as the 
blood gradually loses its oxygen. A^ 
the patient’s condition improves, the 
reverse of the process occurs. 

Whenever large amounts of fluid 
are lost from the body, danger of 
death from acid intoxication ensues. 
Therefore, the chief step in the 
treatment is restoration of the fluid. 
Large quantities of normal or physi¬ 
ological salt solution are given to 
the patient by injection Into the 
veins. Delay may be fatal, and fre¬ 
quently it is necessary to give one 
or two quarts of this solution, every 
six or eight hours, for two or three 
days. The acidosis may be overcome 
by giving large doses of sodium 
bicarbonate. Usually the person with 
cholera k content to remain in bed. 
Warmth is sustained by blankets, 
hot-water bottles, and electric pads. 
The physidan can help to control 


the vomiting by prescription of 
proper remedies. 

In the United States, cholera has 
ceased to be a serious problem, al¬ 
though it still occurs in many other 

parts of the world. 

CHOLESTEROL^ a fatty substance, 
a basis for hundreds of chemical 
processes in the body. Animal meat, 
cream, butter, and eggs contain large 
amounts of cholesterol and its pres¬ 
ence in excess amounts in the blood 
stream is believed by many medical 
investigators to be responsible for a 
type of arterial hardening known as 
atherosclerosis. In this disease, cho¬ 
lesterol plaques in the inside wall of 
arteries cause the wall to thicken and 
roughen. Ultimately the flow of blood 
through that portion of the artery is 
restricted, or a piece of the roughened 
wall may tear away and block the 
flow erf blood to those tissues served 
by the artery. When this occurs in 
the arteries that supply the heart 
muscle with blood the condition is 
called coronary thrombosis. 

Dr. John Gofman and his associ¬ 
ates at the University of California 
have proposed that a definite cor¬ 
relation exists between severe coro¬ 
nary heart attacks and excess blood 
cholesterol. Other medical investiga¬ 
tors have produced atherosclerosis in 
animals by feeding them diets high 
in cholesterol. Certain heart spe¬ 
cialists advocate a low-fat, low-cho¬ 
lesterol diet to prevent or control 
coronary heart disease, but others 
believe that since the body produces 
its own cholesterol, dietary restriction 


224 



CHONDROMA 


CHOREA 


of it will not help appreciably. In¬ 
vestigations indicate that factors 
other than the existence of excess 
cholesterol may be responsible for 
arterial hardening. These may involve 
the body’s ability to metabolize the 
cholesterol, or its ratio to other sub¬ 
stances, such as protein and phos- 
phatides, in the blood stream, the size 
and number of the cholesterol 
molecules, and the effect of exercise 
on the amount of circulating cho¬ 
lesterol. In one experiment. Dr. Fred¬ 
erick J. Stare of Harvard University’s 
School of Public Health reports a 
definite correlation between exercise 
and a reduction in certain types of 
cholesterol molecules. 

CHONDROMA, a slowly developing 
tumor growing from tissues or carti¬ 
lage. In the chest this tumor tends to 
spread toward important organs. 
Generally benign, chondroma may 
recur after removal by surgery. 

CHOREA, more familiarly known as 
St. Vitus’ dance, a disease of the 
nervous system which causes in¬ 
voluntary twitching of various parts 
of the body. Children prior to puberty 
are most often affected. 

Unlike many diseases of the nerv¬ 
ous system, St. Vitus’ dance normally 
lasts a relatively short time, often no 
more than twelve weeks. Sometimes 
relapses occur, and in other instances 
the disease may endure for one or 
two years, although not usually. 

Chorea is believed to be the result 
of a general streptococcus infection 
which in some apparently indirect 
way, perhaps through toxic sub¬ 


stances developed by the germs of 
the infection, strikes at the brain and 
the nervous system. Children may 
develop a temporary, habitual twitch 
from imitating the movements of 
other people, but this is completely 
different in origin and in character 
from the involuntary twitching that 
is seen in St. Vitus’ dance. 

The onset of the disease, which 
often accompanies rheumatic fever, 
may appear as a generalized illness 
with fever, vomiting, and headache, 
along with dizziness and weakness. 
The first disturbances of bodily 
movement are often mistaken for 
clumsiness of the child. However, the 
true nature of the ailment soon be¬ 
comes apparent. 

When fully developed, the move¬ 
ments are rapid, of short duration, 
and distinctive; none exactly dupli¬ 
cates any that preceded. Muscular 
coordination becomes difficult and 
approximately 25 per cent of the 
cases are so severe as to disturb the 
speech function. The chUd becomes 
irritable and restless, and his memory, 
attention span, and emotions may be 
mildly disturbed. 

The treatment of chorea, a disease 
implicating the whole system and not 
just isolated parts, begins with pro¬ 
longed bed rest of three to six weeks 
at least. Because of the close relation¬ 
ship to streptococcus infection, the 
chUd should be kept under close ob¬ 
servation. Any infection of the throat, 
in the tonsils or adenoids, in the teeth 
or elsewhere should be eliminated 
quickly and the child kept in bed. 
Both in streptococcus infections and 


225 



IHOiiON 


CIRCULATORY SYSTEM 


a chorea attentioa must be given 
he heart, which may be particularly 
iffected. The use of penicillin or sulfa 
s recommended by the American 
3eart Association to prevent strep- 
:ococcal infection and to protect 
igainst a recurrence of rheumatic 
fever. 

Baths and sedative drugs directed 
at alleviating the symptoms of chorea 
are frequently quite helpful. Both 
heat and drugs striking at the infec- 
doo itself are often beneficial, but 
neither are specifically effective. 

Convalescence of the patient with 
chorea should be gradual, with a 
nutritional diet assuring plenty of 
vitamins and minerals. Exercise and 
play should be resumed in modera¬ 
tion and under supervision, but the 
child must relax and not overdo. See 
also ATAXIA. 

CHORION, the outermost of the 
fetal membranes which covers, nour¬ 
ishes, and protects the developing 
ovum. Later it becomes the fetal part 
of the placenta. 

CHROMOBLASTOMYCOSIS, a 
rare skin infection caused by a fungus 
which grows on plants and trees in 
warm humid areas. Only a few cases 
have been reported in the United 
States, but the disease occurs more 
frequently in South America. 

The infection usually starts on the 
feet or legs. The skin turns purplish 
red and develops colored, warty, 
caulfflower-like growths. X-ray, used 
externally in combination with ap¬ 
propriate drags, has successfully dis¬ 
posed of the fungus and the growths. 
A potential danger, however, in any 


such disorder is that the offending 
organism will reach the lung or some 
other vital part where it may cause 

death. 

CHRONIC signifies long-continued 
or of long duration. A chronic dis¬ 
ease is prolonged, often slowly pro¬ 
gressing and never completely cured 
—as, for example, chronic bronchitis 
or chronic arthritis. 

CHRYSAROBIN, an orange powder, 
derived from the bark of a Brazilian 
tree, which stains the skin a deep 
brown. It is used to treat psoriasis, 
and is also effective in fungus in¬ 
fections called dhobie itch and g3mi or 
jockey itch, involving the skin of 
the groin, perineum, and perianal 
regions. 

CELIA, fine, hairlike appendages 
which cover the surface of mucous 
membranes, the moist sensitive lining 
of the respiratory tract. The cilia are 
filtering organisms, a protective meas¬ 
ure to keep harmful particles out of 
the lung. They move upward and 
downward, and through the more 
pronounced upward movement, mu¬ 
cus, dust, and other infectious par¬ 
ticles are swept and propelled toward 
the mouth, so that they are not 
breathed into the lungs. Eyelashes are 
also cilia, and protect the eyes from 
foreign particles. 

CIRCULATORY SYSTEM, The 
heart pumps the blood through a 
“pipeline” of closed tubes or vessels. 
This pipeline forms two major circu¬ 
lar routes in the body, the systemic 
circulation and the pulmonary circu¬ 
lation, with the heart acting as a 
central pump. The circulatory system. 


226 




Circulatory’ System — Chart shows the path of bfood through the heart as if comes in by 
the veins and goes out through arteries. Large veins bring the blood Into the right heart, 
then arteries conduct blood from the right heart to the lungs. Blood from the lungs goes to 
the left heart through veins and goes out of the left heart to the body through the great 
artery (aorta). 


with its major and minor routes, 
reaches every cell in the body, bring¬ 
ing the blood with its life-sustaining 
products from the organs where they 
are manufactured to the tissues 
where they are needed. It also carries 
away the waste products to other 
organs in the body, where they are 
broken down and either converted 
to be used again or excreted as 
waste. In addition, the circulatory 
system takes care of the more active 
organs by bringing them an increased 
flow of blood, whereas those organs 
which are less active, or temporarily 
at rest, receive less blood. 

The heart is divided into a right 


side and a left side. Each side is 
further divided into two chambers 
an auricle and a ventricle. The 
auricles are the collecting depots for 
the blood, while the ventricles pump 
the blood out of the heart into the 
blood vessels. 

In the systemic circulation, the 
blood is pumped from the left ven¬ 
tricle into the aorta, or large artery, 
passing through a series of smaller 
arteries which branch from it, then 
continues through the arterioles, or 
smallest arteries, which end in a fine 
network of tiny vessels called the 
capillaries. The capillaries transfer 
the blood, with its oxygen and 


227 



CiiCULATORY SYSTEM 


CiiCULATOiY SYSTEM 


nutriment, to the various tissues of 
the body and then conduct it from 
the tissues into the venules, or tiny 
veins, on through larger veins until 
it finally reaches the inferior vena 
cava, one of the two great veins on 
the right side of the heart. From here, 
it passes into the right auricle, and 
thus completes the systemic circle. 
The blood, venous blood, dark in 
color, which enters the right auricle, 
has deposited most of its oKygen, and 
has picked the carbon dioxide from 
the tissues. 

Before the blood can resume its 
systemic Sow, it must secure a fresh 
supply of oxygen. The right ventricle 
now pumps the blood through the 
pulmonary artery into the capillaries 
of the lungs, where it deposits its car¬ 
bon dioxide and gathers up the new 
oxygen. This blood, now a bright 
red, is arterial blood which then en¬ 
ters the pulmonary vein, flows into 
the left auricle from which it enters 
the left ventricle, and is then ready 
to start on its route through the body 
again. This circuitous routine is the 
pulmonary circulation. 

In addition to these two major cir¬ 
culations, some of the blood stream 
from the systemic circulation is di¬ 
verted by the capillaries of the stom¬ 
ach and intestinal tract to the portal 
vein and is carried to the liver, which 
acts as a storage depot for blood. 
Here some of the impurities are re¬ 
moved and excreted into the digestive 
tract, and the blood is returned 
through the hepatic vein to the su¬ 
perior vena cava of the heart. This 
system is the portal circulation. An¬ 
other accessory circulation from the 


systemic feeds blood to the kidneys 
and is called the renal circulation. 
The coronary arteries, veins, and 
their capillaries supply the heart it¬ 
self with oxygen and nutriments and 
remove waste material, and consti¬ 
tute the coronary circulation. The 
brain and head are served by the two 
carotid arteries which bring the blood 
supply, and also by the jugular veins 
which carry away the blood and waste 
materials. 

The circulatory pipeline consists of 
the three types of blood vessels de¬ 
scribed: the arteries, the veins, and 
the capillaries. The capillaries con¬ 
nect the ends of the smallest arteries 
to the beginnings of the smallest 
veins. Valves inside the heart and al^so 
in the veins keep the flow of blood 
continuous and in one direction. In 
the veins they are spaced at various 
distances, opening toward the heart, 
so that the flow cannot go backward. 
The valves control the rate of the 
flow and its distribution through the 
body. The final control of the blood 
flow is exerted by the capillaries, 
which are so small that the blood 
cells can pass through only in single 
or double file. 

The walls of the capillaries are a 
thin layer of fine platelike cells, en¬ 
dothelium, which are dovetailed to 
form a membranous network where 
the blood deposits its nutriment, oxy¬ 
gen, and other substances needed by 
the body tissues, and from which it 
picks Bp the gases and other waste 
products. Those tissues which are not 
reached easily by this interchange re¬ 
ceive their nutriment from the liquid 
constituents of the Mood, which also 


228 



CliCyMClSiON 


CliCUMCiSiON 


filter tiirougli the capillary network 
and carry food and oxygen to the 
tissues. This clear fluid which filters 
out of the capillaries is the tissue 
fluid. The capillaries are found 
throughout all tissues and organs of 
the body,* and are more numerous, 
where the body organs are most ac¬ 
tive. Over a million capillaries may 
run through a square inch of muscle 
tissue, and if all the capillaries were 
joined in a single tube it would 
stretch for thousands of miles. 

The walls of the arteries must be 
thick and strong to accommodate the 
stream of blood within them which is 
pumped by the heart under great 
pressure. They consist of three layers, 
the endothelium, or fine inner layer; 
the middle layer, on which the 
strength and caliber of the vessel 
depends, which is a thick coat of 
strong muscle fibers and heavy elastic 
tissue permitting expansion and con¬ 
traction of the artery; and the outside 
coat, or adventitia, a thick layer of 
connective tissue which gives the ves¬ 
sel elasticity and enables it to act as a 
reservoir for the blood flow, and at 
the same time prevents the blood 
from oozing into the tissues. 

The walls of the veins are struc¬ 
turally similar to the arteries, but 
they are thinner and their diameter is 
much larger since the flow of blood 
through the veins and into the heart 
is under less pressure and slower in 
rate. 

In the course of normal routine, 
and more so in disease, much strain 
is placed upon the structures that con¬ 
stitute the circulatory system. As cells 
deteriorate, new cells replace them. 


Fortunately not ail the ceils wear out 
at the same time, and the process of 
replacement continues throughout 
life, so that a steady balance is main¬ 
tained between the removal of worn- 
out cells by the circulating blood and 
the regeneration of new cells. See also 
CORONARY thrombosis; EMBOLISM; 
heart; lymphatic system, 

CIRCUMCISION, is the surgical re¬ 
moval of the loose fold of the skin, 
the foreskin, which covers the head 
of the penis. 

Circumcision was originafiy a re¬ 
ligious rite in ancient Egypt and 
among Hebrews, Mohammedans, 
South Sea Islanders, and American 
Indians. The Book of Genesis inter¬ 
prets circumcision as a blood cove¬ 
nant, and it is still practiced as such 
among some Jews. 

Today the operation is still rec¬ 
ommended by many doctors as a 
routine hygienic measure, or to di¬ 
minish the possibility of contracting 
venereal diseases. With improved 
sanitary conditions, permitting fre¬ 
quent bathing and washing, circum¬ 
cision as a sanitary measure is proba¬ 
bly not as significant as it formerly 
was. 

The best time for the operation is 
before the infant is ten days old, 
when it represents a minor procedure. 
Circumcision should always be done 
under strictest surgical or aseptic con¬ 
ditions. Proper repair of the tissues 
after the extra skin has been removed 
is essential. If the doctor’s instruc¬ 
tions regarding protection and cleans¬ 
ing of the wound are carefully fol¬ 
lowed, complications are rare. 


229 



CIRRHOSIS 


CLEFT PALATE 


Circumcision is recommended 
■when the foreskin is unusually long 
so that it retains urine which might 
cause infection. Inflammation and 
irritation tmder the foreskin are also 
associated with various nervous mani¬ 
festations. 

CIRRHOSIS, a chronic progressive 
disease, essentially inflammatory, 
with a pathological hardening of tis¬ 
sue brought about by an increase of 
connective tissue elements. The lungs, 
ovaries, heart, or stomach may be 
affected with cirrhosis, but it occurs 
more often in the kidney and liver. 

Cirrhosis of the kidney, chronic 
interstitial nephritis, is a chronic in¬ 
flammation of the connective tissue 
elements of the kidney. Cirrhosis of 
the liver, the most frequent type, is 
usually a disease of adults but may 
occasionally occur in yoimger people, 
and is three times more common 
among men than women. It involves 
a scarring or hardening of the liver, 
produced by an overgrowth of the 
connective tissue elements to the neg¬ 
lect of the true hepatic cells. 

Heavy consumers of alcohol are 
often victims of cirrhosis, but mod¬ 
erate drinkers may become affected. 
The disease may also be caused by 
bacterial infection, particularly from 
bacteria of the colon, infectious cir¬ 
rhosis. See also LWER. 

CITRIC ACID, a tribasic acid occur¬ 
ring in the juice of many fruits and 
in various animal tissues. It appears 
as translucent crystals or a white 
crystalline powder, soluble in water, 
and is employed as an acid flavoring 
and in effervescent drinks. Citric acid 
has an alkalizing effect, but is with¬ 


out vitamin value and is not an 
effective substitute for citrus fruits. 

CLAUSTROPHOBIA, an intense 
fear of being in a confined area. See 
also AGORAPHOBIA. 

CLAVICLE, or “collarbone,” the 
curved bone which extends from the 
top of the breastbone out to each of 
the shoulders. Because the two clavi¬ 
cles are thin and small and support 
much weight they are frequently and 
easily broken. While mending, a small 
bony disfigurement is likely to occur, 
unless the person will lie motionless 
on his back, without a pillow, so that 
the two parts can remain in perfect 
adjustment to each other until they 
have completely grown together. See 
also FRACTURES. 

CLEFT PALATE, a congenital de¬ 
fect, due to failure in fusion of em¬ 
bryonic facial processes, which results 
in a fissure through the palate. This 
cleavage, starting in the soft palate, 
may extend forward all the way 
across the bony roof of the mouth 
and even reach to the upper lip, re¬ 
sulting in harelip. 

A person with this deformity is ab¬ 
normally susceptible to inflammations 
in the area of the palate. Speech is 
difficult, as well as sucking, drinking, 
and chewing. Food being swallowed 
will frequently go through the roof of 
the mouth into the nostrils, and spe¬ 
cial feeding techniques become nec¬ 
essary. 

A cleft palate can usually be cor¬ 
rected by an operation in which the 
tissues in the roof of the mouth are 
loosened and then fitted together. 


230 



CLEFT PALATE 


CLEFT PALATE 



(A) 


Cleft Paiafe — Cleft palate is the most fre¬ 
quent of congenita! anomalies. The baby is 
born with a defect of the roof of the mouth. 
The opening in the roof of the mouth allows 
direct communication with the nose. Feeding 
is the major problem encountered with cleft 
palate. Sucking is difficult or impossible, 
and the milk tends to run out through the 
nose instead of being swallowed. Eventually, 
dentition and sp^eech are affected. Drawing 
(A) shows the opening in the roof of the 
mouth. Part of the posterior pharyngeal flap 
will be brought forward and attached to the 
posterior end of the short soft palate. (B) 
shows the flap attached. (C) View of the 
roof of the mouth showing the repaired 
fissure. 

This operation is sometimes per¬ 
formed as early as the third month, 
or as late as the third year. If done 
before the child begins to talk, unde¬ 
sirable speech habits can be pre¬ 
vented. Even after a successful opera¬ 
tion, however, some physical defect 
may remain. New techniques em¬ 
ploying braces or plate or other 
prosthetic devices, along with inten¬ 
sive training, can significantly benefit 



(B) 



persons with cleft palate. See also 

harelip; lips; palate. 


231 




CLIMATE 


CLIMATE 


CLIMATE, the average weather 
condition of an area over a period of 
years, as indicated by tne tempera¬ 
ture, rainfall, barometer, and other 
measurements. The connection be¬ 
tween climate and health is a subject 
which has interested people for cen¬ 
turies. Greek and Roman physicians 
recognized that malaria affected per¬ 
sons living in low marshy areas, but 
they believed the cause of malaria 
was sleeping in night air. Hippocrates, 
the father of medicine who lived in 
the third century B.c., wrote, “If 
there be no rivers and the water that 
the people drink be marshy and stag¬ 
nant, the physique of the people must 
show protruding bellies and enlarged 
spleens.” He did not know that the 
protruding belly and enlarged spleen 
are results of malaria, prevalent in 
marshy areas. In his book Air, Water 
and Places, he notes that . . the 
inhabitants of a region that is moun¬ 
tainous, rugged, high and watered, 
where the changes of the seasons 
exhibit strong contrasts, are likely to 
be of big physique, with a nature well 
adapted for endurance and courage.” 
This is the first recorded recognition 
that the Temperate Zone is a region 
conducive to human well-being. 

More recently, persons with “con¬ 
sumption” or tuberculosis went to 
dry, high-aititude areas in an attempt 
to cure their illness. However, today 
it is felt that climate is not important 
in treating tuberculosis, and emphasis 
is placed on drugs, food, rest, and 
competent medical care. 

Persons with rheumatic condition 
frequently feel better when they are 
not exposed to cold and dampness. 


Research on rheumatism has shown 
that changes occur in the composition 
of the body tissues, including the 
blood, when there are changes in 
barometric pressure. Changes in 
blood supply to the joints are associ¬ 
ated with sudden changes in tempera¬ 
ture. While climate cannot cause 
rheumatic conditions, it may lower 
the resistance so that a rheumatic in¬ 
flammation results. 

For years the belief has been preva¬ 
lent that dampness, cold, and drafts 
are associated with colds and pneu¬ 
monia. However, statistics seem to 
indicate that, unless a person has a 
tendency to respiratory aflments, in¬ 
clement weather does not cause such 
illnesses. For example, students at 
Stanford University at Palo Alto, 
California, have about as many 
coughs and colds as students at Har¬ 
vard University in Massachusetts, 
despite the fact that the California 
climate is mild and the Massachusetts 
climate rigorous. However, persons 
whose resistance is generally low will 
be more susceptible to inflammation 
of the nose, throat, and sinuses during 
cold weather, and will benefit by a 
change to a warm dry climate. 

Persons with heart disease do not 
do well at high altitudes, because of 
increased difficulty in getting oxygen 
for circulation. 

Generally a mild climate is most 
beneficial to those persons with 
chronic diseases, and a specialist may 
propose that a change of climate be 
made to relieve their S3nnptoms. But 
it is wise to check wi& a physician 
before assuming that another climate 
will be more beneficial. 


232 



CLINITEST, a commercially availa¬ 
ble kit by means of which persons 
having or suspecting a diabetic tend¬ 
ency may check the extent of sugar 
in the uorine. See also diabetes. 

CLITORIS, the organ in women 
which resembles, in miniature form, 
the penis of the male. This small 
tubelike body is located in the angle 


at the top of the vtdva, the external 
sex organ of women. Like the penis, 
the clitoris is composed of tissue 
which becomes engorged with blood, 
and hard and erect during sexual ex¬ 
citement. See also reproduction 

SYSTEM. 

CLUBFOOT, a deformity of the 
foot, present at birth or caused sub- 


255 




COAGULATION 


COAGULATION 


sequently by muscle paralysis or in- 
jury^ in wMch the heel or the ball of 
the foot or one edge of it does not 
touch the ground. 

In three-fourths of the cases noted 
at birth, the heel and inner edge of 
the foot are raised. This condition 
occurs once in every thousand births, 
and considerably more than half of 
those affected are male children. Also, 
in more than half the deformity 
occurs on only one side. 

Treatment must be started at the 
earliest possible moment. The later 
therapy begins, the longer it will take 
to remedy the deformity. Children 
under a year can be treated in twenty- 
three weeks, whereas those of six 
years or more require almost forty- 
two weeks. One of the signal achieve¬ 
ments of modem medical science has 
been the development of treatment 
for club foot. 

The doctor, usually an orthopedist, 
will outline a routine of the manipu¬ 
lations of the parts involved to get 
them into the correct position and 
then make the position secure with 
one or more of the devices designed 
especially for the purpose, such as 
adhesive bindings, plaster casts, or 
braces and splints. Affter the proper 
position has been firmly established, 
special exercises, shoes, massage, and 
other measures which may be bene¬ 
ficial will be prescribed. Active treat¬ 
ment often continues for several 
months, and follow-up supervision is 
necessary for years. 

Manipulation alone may not be 
satisfactory. Then surgical rearrange¬ 
ment of the affected tissues and parts 
becomes necessary. 


The cause of clubfoot is unknown. 
Heredity is suspected by some per¬ 
sons, because approximately 5 per 
cent of cases occur in families in 
which the deformity has appeared 
previously; others believe that an in¬ 
correct position of the child before 
birth is responsible. 

COAGULATION, the formation of 
a coagulum, clot, or curd as in blood 
or milk. When bleeding is present, 
threadlike fibers called fibrin are 
produced by a substance in the blood, 
the fibrinogen. These fibers trap 
white and red blood corpuscles which 
form a clot. Contraction of the 
fibrin squeezes out the liquid portion 
of the blood, the serum, and a crust 
develops. The system of clotting is 
counteracted by agents, including 
heparin and other anticoagulants, 
which keep the blood fluid. The 
power of coagulation of the blood 
varies with different persons. In peo¬ 
ple with hemophilia, a hereditary 
disease, the clotting is so retarded 
that they bleed profusely from minor 
wounds and may even bleed to death. 

Formation of a blood clot in a 
coronary artery may obstruct the flow 
of blood to the heart muscle and pro¬ 
duce coronary thrombosis. The in¬ 
cidence of clotting may be increased 
when the person is under stress. A 
blood clot blocking an artery of the 
brain, usually where a weak spot 
has resulted through arteriosclerosis, 
is able to produce some conditions of 
rheumatic heart disease. Coagulation 
of blood in the lower body regions 
can cause serious complications if 
particles of the blood clot reach the 


234 



COCAINE 


COCCYX 


lungs and obstruct the major blood 
vessels. 

In 19173 Dr« Jay McLean of Balti¬ 
more succeeded in isolating heparin, 
and since then dicumarol, Tromexan, 
and other anticoagulants have been 
developed and the administration 
of anticoagulants has become a 
significant medication. See also 
CORONARY thrombosis; EMBOLISM; 
hemophilia; menorrhagia. 

COCAINE^ an alkaloid derived from 
the coca bush, in use for centuries. 
Inca priests in Peru, for example, 
were aware of its anesthetic effect and 
chewed coca leaves in an attempt to 
improve their physical endurance. 

Medically it was first used as an 
anesthetic in eye operations in Vienna 
in 1884, Cocaine is now employed as 
a local anesthetic. It produces tem¬ 
porary insensitivity to pain when ap¬ 
plied to the surface of mucous mem¬ 
branes or injected by hypodermic 
needle. 

Cocaine is habit-forming and poi¬ 
sonous, and should never be used in 
any way except when prescribed and 
administered by a physician. The 
amount of cocaine required to poison 
varies greatly; some people react un¬ 
favorably even to small doses. New 
synthetic compounds have been de¬ 
veloped which are similar to cocaine 
but less toxic. See also drug addic¬ 
tion. 

COCCIDIOIDOMYCOSIS, also 
known as desert fever, San Joaquin 
fever, valley fever, or the bumps, 
a disease with pulmonary symptoms 
caused by one of the fungi, coccidi- 


oides immitis, which thrives in the 
dry dusty areas of the San Joaquir 
Valley and in the southwestern states 
During World War II, thousands o1 
servicemen stationed in camps 
throughout this area became ill witl 
coccidioidomycosis after inhaling thi 
tiny invisible particles of spore-lader 
dust. Spores may also enter the skii 
through open wounds. 

The first symptoms, which resem' 
ble the symptoms of tuberculosis 
are generally chills, fever, headache 
general malaise, night sweats, anc 
coughing. These symptoms usualb 
subside after a week or two and smal 
bumps may then appear under th« 
skin, which also disappear in time 
In severe cases, x-rays show change 
in the lungs and occasionally thin 
walled cavities which may persist fo 
years. 

Recovery from a simple lung infec¬ 
tion is usually rapid and compleh 
even without treatment, but in casej 
where deep lung cavities have devel 
oped, surgery may be indicated. 

The growing prevalence of coc 
cidioidomycosis has made it a publii 
health concern. About 90 per cent o: 
the people living in these arid region 
have had the infection within a ten 
year period as a result of inhalini 
the spores of the fungus. Droughts ii 
this area add to the disease hazards 
Residents or visitors who show sign 
of a chronic infection resembling am 
of the serious respiratory disease 
should have chest x-rays and skin mu 
blood tests. 

COCCYX, from the Greek meanin, 
“shaped like the bill of a cuckoo. 


23 



CODEINE 


COFFEE 


the last bone at the lowermost end of 
the spine. 

CODEINE, an alkaloid derived from 
opium and closely allied in chemical 
constitution to morphine. Though 
weaker, its action is similar to that of 
morphine, and it is used medically to 
dimmish sensitivity to pain. 

COD LIVER OIL, the partially de- 
stearinated fixed oil, obtained from 
the fresh livers of cod. The liver of 
the cod (and also of the halibut) is 
one of the richest sources of vitamin 
A and D, and cod liver oil has been 
known for many years as an effective 
treatment for malnutrition. Mild 
cases of rickets improve quickly with 
cod liver oil. Diets which do not con¬ 
tain enough fat-soluble vitamins are 
a basic factor of sinusitis in children, 
and cod liver oil is recommended by 
many physicians as an effective pre¬ 
ventive measure against this infec¬ 
tion. Every growing baby and child 
should have cod liver oil or its 
equivalent in vitamins A and D, 
and nursing mothers are advised by 
physicians to take it regularly. The 
amount of cod liver oil usually rec¬ 
ommended is a teaspoonful daily of 
the more concentrated preparations, 
or two teaspoonfuls of the less con¬ 
centrated. However, since today more 
and more foods are being vitamin- 
enriched, the diet usually does not 
need to be supplemented by cod liver 
oil. See also child care. 

COFFEE, a beverage made by an in¬ 
fusion or decoction from the roasted 
and ground or pounded seeds of a 
shrub, small tree, or other species of 


the madder family. Although coffee 
has no nutritional value, taken in 
moderation it does have some dis¬ 
tinct pharmacological worth. 

In his The Romance of Medicine, 
Dr. Benjamin Lee Gordon describes 
its discovery. “For centuries the cof¬ 
fee plant was looked upon as a use¬ 
less weed until one day a Turkish 
herdsman noticed that some goats in 
his charge which were feeding on 
the coffee beans became unusually 
playful and hilarious. Being curious 
to know the reason for their peculiar 
actions, he picked some coffee beans 
and parched them in the sun; when 
he reached home he brewed them 
and drank the beverage. To his sur¬ 
prise, after taking a cupful of the 
beverage he felt greatly stimulated 
without any bad effect. On the fol¬ 
lowing Friday, the Mohammedan 
Sabbath, he treated his guests with 
this stimulant and they experienced 
the same effect. Henceforth, coffee 
became a national drink among Mo¬ 
hammedans aU over the world, who 
use it in a strong and syrupy way.” 

An average cup of coffee contains 
about one grain of caffeine, an alka¬ 
loid which stimulates the brain, kid¬ 
ney, and circulation. It increases the 
force and beat of the heart and the 
flow of urine and thus helps cleanse 
the body of metabolic end-products. 
This action has made coffee valuable 
in cases of edema or dropsy, condi¬ 
tions in which fluid accumulates ex¬ 
cessively in the tissues. In these cases, 
it is vital to increase the heart rate so 
that more blood is pumped into the 
blood vessels, thus promoting greater 


236 



COLCHICINE 


COLIC 


flow through the kidneys with elimi¬ 
nation of fluid. 

Generally a cup of coffee after din¬ 
ner may have a good effect on the 
digestion since it increases the gastric 
juice. However, an excess of coffee 
can easily have toxic effects, such as 
rapid pulse, nervousness, irritability, 
and insomnia. In some persons, too 
much coffee may even bring on at¬ 
tacks of dizziness and faintness, or 
palpitation from an overaccelerated 
heart rate and force. The amount of 
coffee that can safely be drunk varies 
among people. Although Voltaire is 
said to have drunk more than fifty 
cups of coffee a day, for some people 
a few cups a day may be excessive. 
People should discover what is the 
correct amount for them. 

Tests made in 1955 by the Ameri¬ 
can Medical Association established 
that a cup of regular ground coffee 
has aim :)st twice as much caffeine as 
a cup ot instant coffee, and a cup of 
regular decaffeinated coffee has about 
one-third the amount of caffeine as a 
cup of regular ground coffee. 

COLCHICINE, a water-soluble, pale 
brownish alkaloid derived from the 
meadow saffron which has been used 
as an efficient pain reliever in gout 
for more than a hundred years. How¬ 
ever, it has proved of little value in 
other types of arthritis and rheuma¬ 
tism. See also gout. 

COLD. See common cold. 

COLD CREAM, a mixture in an 
ointment of petrolatum, lanolin, and 
rosewater, which is useful for sooth¬ 
ing dry, inflamed, or irritated skin. 


and also for removing cosmetics. See 

also COSMETICS. 

COLD SORE. See herpes simplex. 

COLIC, the abnormal and violent 
contraction of certain intemal muscu¬ 
lar tissues. Intestinal colic is caused 
by a sudden contraction of the intes¬ 
tine. When the bile ducts contract 
abnormally, biliary colic results, and 
renal colic is caused by a tightening 
of the tube, the ureter, which passes 
between the kidney and bladder. Al¬ 
ternate contraction and relaxation is 
the normal behavior of these organs, 
and pain occurs only when this con¬ 
traction becomes spasmodic. 

Intestinal colic is the most com¬ 
mon. The pain is noticed usually 
around the navel, and is often ac¬ 
companied by a clogging or loosening 
of the bowels. If the cause of pain is 
doubtful, cathartics and laxatives 



the tubes known as the hepatic duct, the 
cystic duct, and the common bile duct, which 
carry the bile to the intestines. From the 
pancreas comes another duct which carries 
a digestive fluid called trypsin into the 
intestine. 


237 




COLiTiS 


COLITIS 


should be avoided but an enema may 
be given if necessary. A simple chill, 
infected food, or a nervous condition 
are a few of the many possible causes 
of colic. Colic may be easily confused 
with a serious disorder, such as ap¬ 
pendicitis. If the pain does not re¬ 
spond promptly to simple treatment, 
such as an electric pad or a hot-water 
bottle, or bicarbonate of soda, a 
physician should be called. 

Intestinal colic, produced by gas, is 
commonly seen in infants. Often this 
condition results from the air taken 
in with the child’s milk or food. Oc- 
casionaEy, however, it may be gen¬ 
erated by the fermentation of food 
in the bowels. Regardless of the 
source, this gas can often be relieved 
simply by placing the baby across 
one’s shoulder after every feeding 
and tapping it lightly on the back un¬ 
til it “burps.” If the pain persists or 
is severe, a doctor should be con¬ 
sulted. 

A special type of stomach colic, 
afiiicting adults, which involves spas¬ 
modic contractions of the large 
bowel, is known as mucous colic. The 
pain occurs characteristically after 
meals, and is located chiefly in the 
right section of the lower abdomen. 
Such symptoms should be carefully 
investigated by a specialist who may 
take x-rays, inspect stools, and study 
the person’s diet. Occasionally psy¬ 
chiatric observation may be neces¬ 
sary. 

Renal colic, distress after meals 
and in the lower right abdomen, is 
usually caused by a stone in the kid¬ 
ney trying to descend to the bladder. 
The pain almost always starts in the 


kidney area and moves to the abdo¬ 
men, leg, and genitals. Nausea and a 
frequent desire to urinate appear. In 
attempting to walk, the person will 
experience a pronounced tendency to 
tip his body to the side affected, de¬ 
pending on which of the kidney areas 
is affected. The pain may fluctuate 
and may even be severe enough to 
induce delirium. Renal colic can be 
subdued by proper drugs. The pain 
will sometimes persist for days, but 
usually is limited to twelve hours or 
less. The stone is sometimes passed 
spontaneously in the urine, but fre¬ 
quently surgical treatment is required. 
See also constipation; diarrhea; 

INDIGESTION. 

COLITIS, inflammation of the colon, 
the part of the large intestine extend¬ 
ing from the cecum to the rectum. 
Various forms of colitis can occur. 
Simple colitis is an acute irritation or 
infection of the colon, accompanied 
by diarrhea. Some types of colitis are 
caused by infection of the colon by 
specific organisms. 

Mucous colitis is a condition in 
which the mucous membrane of the 
colon is inflamed, with symptoms of 
colicky pain, and constipation or di¬ 
arrhea. It would seem to be primarily 
a psychosomatic ailment, which fre¬ 
quently becomes chronic. 

Another form which is probably 
usually nervous in origin is ulcerative 
colitis, characterized by ulceration 
of the mucous membrane of the 
colon. The symptoms may range 
from only painless excretion of blood 
in stools to dysentery, fever, and 
death as a result of exhaustion, per- 


238 



COLLAGEN DISEASES 


COLLAGEN DISEASES 


foration of the colon and general 
peritonitis. Less critical cases usually 
recover completely, although fre¬ 
quently there are periods of relapse. 
Sometimes the disease becomes 
chronic, but without producing any 
severe disability. The entire length 
of the colon becomes scarred and 
thickened with ulcerations, and at 
this stage such complications as per¬ 
foration, malignant disease, nutri¬ 
tional deficiency, and intestinal ob¬ 
struction frequently occur. 

Treatment of ulcerative colitis re¬ 
quires patient medical care, including 
bed rest, proper diet, sedatives, con¬ 
trol of infection, and, if necessary, 
blood transfusions. Cortisone and 
ACTH have been used in treatment, 
but it is too soon to determine their 
value. Occasionally surgical removal 
of the colon is advised; and when 
emotional factors are thought to be 
involved in any way, psychotherapy 
is recommended, 

COLLAGEN DISEASES, the name 
for certain diseases of the connec¬ 
tive tissue. They are rather unusual 
and rare diseases and are often 
grouped together under the general 
term of collagen diseases. Their 
names are polyarteritis nodosa, dif¬ 
fuse lupus erythematosus, scleroder¬ 
ma, and dermatomyositis. They re¬ 
semble each other in that all of them 
represent disturbances of connective 
tissue in the body in contrast to 
glandular tissue or surface secreting 
tissue. An important fact about the 
collagen diseases is the discovery, 
made in 1950, that all of them are 
benefited, at least temporarily, by 


ACTH or cortisone Arthritis, which 
also responds to the drugs men¬ 
tioned, occurs commonly in con¬ 
nection With each of these diseases 

Polyaftentis nodosa. Polyarteritis 
nodosa is a disease in which the 
blood vessels are chiefly affected. 
Only about 500 cases of this disease 
have been reported. Because this 
disease is primarily associated with 
serious damage of blood vessels, it 
may occur in any part of the body. 
The condition affects men four times 
as often as women and mostly those 
between twenty and forty years old. 
Arthritis and many of the reactions 
associated with hypersensitivity are 
observed in this disease. 

Lupus erythematoms. Dissemi¬ 
nated lupus erythematosus is a chron¬ 
ic, usually severe, disorder occurring 
mostly in females fifteen to forty 
years old. A characteristic is a but¬ 
terfly-shaped inflammation over the 
nose. Other symptoms involve the 
joints and the heart. 

Scleroderma. Scleroderma is a dis¬ 
ease that affects the connective tissue 
of the body and particularly that m 
the skin, where there is hardening. 
Chiefly women between thirty and 
fifty years old are affected. The 
swelling in the skin may be followed 
by calcification. This disease comes 
on slowly and insidiously, but as it 
progresses, changes occur in the 
skin of the face, neck and arms. 
The skin looks waxy and tight and 
loses Its color and hair. When the 
face is involved there may be diffi¬ 
culty m moving the jaw. Fortunate¬ 
ly this IS not a common disease; 


239 



COlLAiiOME 


COMMON COLD 


cerlainh it is not as serious as poi>- 
diteritis nodosa or diffuse lupus ery¬ 
thematosus which are similar In 
the older forms ot treatment empha¬ 
sis was placed on the use of thy¬ 
roid and \itamms Great care was 
given to prevent secondary infec¬ 
tions More recently attention is 
being focused on the use of ACTH 
and cortisone 

DeinuiionnoMti*? Fourth in this 
group of collagen disorders is one 
called dermatomyositis This is a 
common and often fatal disorder in¬ 
volving the skin and the muscles 
The exact cause is still unknown It 
affects people of all races and col¬ 
ors both men and women, and in 
general those between the ages of 
ten and fifty years 

Characteristic of this condition is 
the involvement of the muscles As 
thev deteriorate, the organs con¬ 
cerned show effects, as m the eyes, 
throat, diaphragm, or muscles be¬ 
tween the nbs The symptoms then 
are difficulties of vision, swallowing, 
breathing, speech, etc These symp¬ 
toms are accompanied by weakness 
and loss of weight 

COLLARBONE, the common name 
for clavicle. See also clavicle. 

COLLODION, a coating or film used 
to protect and dress wounds. It is 
produced by dissolving gun cotton in 
ether and dcohoi 

COLOSTOMY, a surgical operation, 
usually on the left side of the lower 
abdomen, creating a more or less 
permanent opening in the colon to 


permit evacuation after the normal 
rectal and anal opening is lost. 

COMA, a state ot complete loss of 
consciousness from which the per¬ 
son cannot be aroused even by the 
most powerful stimulation The 
forms of coma most frequently seen 
are those following alcoholic in¬ 
toxication and that which occurs m 
diabetes The treatment of such 
forms of coma is so serious that it 
should never be undertaken except 
by a physician See also diabetes 

COMMON COLD, an acute inflam¬ 
mation of the upper respiratory tract, 
involving the nose and throat. It is 
one of the most familiar ailments 
which afflicts mankind yet its specific 
cause is little understood. Suscepti¬ 
bility to colds is almost universal, 
particularly among children. The cold 
IS highly contagious, especially in¬ 
doors, and places where groups of 
people congregate are excellent trans¬ 
mission spots for the infection. 

In large urban communities where 
the climate is temperate, the general 
population averages about three colds 
a year. This median is higher among 
susceptible adults and children. The 
incidence is lowest in the summer, 
rises in the autumn, reaching its peak 
in midwinter and declines in the 
spring. 

Several peak periods occur in 
smaller urban communities. The first 
is in early autumn when schools re¬ 
open and children are brought into 
greater proximity indoors. In addi¬ 
tion to the winter rise in incidence of 
colds, a smaller rise often appears in 
the sprmg. 


240 



Causes of coma in a large city hospital 


100 

90 


10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 



Colds are definitely communicable 
and are transmitted either by direct 
contact or by spread of the infected 
droplets of discharge. A practical 
method to control the spread of colds 
has not yet been developed. The com¬ 
mon cold is due to one or more vi¬ 
ruses. Scientists believe that the virus 
is generally present in the throat but 
it becomes active only when the body 
resistance is lowered. When the cold 
vims attacks the mucous membranes 
of the nose and throat, these tissues 
are weakened and become susceptible 
to infection by bacteria which are 
also generally found in the body. 
The bacteria are secondary invaders 
and the virus paves the way for their 
entry into the mucous membranes. 
Although they are not responsible 
for the common cold, the bacteria 


may initiate a secondary infection 
which either intensifies the local 
inflammation present, prolonging the 
cold, or causes new complications 
such as purulent sinusitis or otitis, an 
inflammation of the ear. Infants and 
young children appear to be more 
susceptible to these secondary infec¬ 
tions than adults. 

A cold usually begins abruptly, 
with a sense of soreness and dryness 
in the nose or back of the throat. 
Within a few hours the nasal pas¬ 
sages feel congested, sneezing devel¬ 
ops and a colorless watery discharge 
comes from the nose. After forty- 
eight hours the cold is usually at its 
peak, and is accompanied by exces¬ 
sive watering of the eyes, huskiness 
of the voice, and difficulty in breath¬ 
ing as the congestion spreads. The 

241 



COMMON COLO 


COMMON COLD 


oasai discharge becomes thick and 
sticky and some coughing may de» 
¥eiop. The cough does not usually 
bring up much discharge unless the 
person has a tendency to chronic 
bronchitis* Frequently a headache, a 
sense of lethargy and malaise, and 
vague pains in the back and limbs 
accompany a cold. A fever is rarely 
present, although in children a tem¬ 
perature of 102° or even higher often 
develops. 

The uncomplicated cold generally 
lasts from one to two weeks and 
terminates without special treatment. 
Colds which persist or recur re¬ 
peatedly, or in which there is a steady 
prolonged fever or chills, particularly 
in children or susceptible adults, may 
indicate complications and a physi¬ 
cian should be consulted. As yet, a 
speciic agent has not been developed 
to control the common cold and treat¬ 
ment is confined to relief of symp¬ 
toms and control of complications. 
Treatment of the cold is not very 
different today from the treatment 
used by past generations. Bed rest 
should be enforced whenever possible 
and as much isolation as is practical. 
Plenty of liquids, hot or cold, a light 
diet, and keeping warm promote 
greater comfort. Aspirin in small re¬ 
peated doses generally gives relief 
m does gargling in cases of sore 
throat. An aspirin tablet or a tea¬ 
spoon of salt dissolved in hot water is 
beneficial. In the latter stages of a 
cold, when the discharge has thick¬ 
ened, an atomizer or nose drops or 
inhaler helps clear the nasal passages. 
They should not be used more than 
once in four hours and if the person 


has a tendency to nasal inflammation 
should be employed sparingly. 

Cold vaccines, wMch are suspen¬ 
sions of dead bacteria collected from 
the discharge of a cold, have not been 
found to be significantly effective 
either when taken by mouth or when 
given as an injection or nasal spray. 
However, continued research is being 
done. The routine use of sulfona¬ 
mides or antibiotics for colds is defi¬ 
nitely discouraged. These drugs 
should be given only in cases with a 
definite bacterial secondary infection 
—^for example, in bronchopneumo¬ 
nia, sinusitis, or otitis media. Persons 
who have a consistent history of re¬ 
current colds with accompanying 
complications may use antibiotics or 
sulfonamides, but only on the advice 
of a physician. 

Although little is known about 
curing a cold, measures can be taken 
to ward off the infection and de¬ 
crease its incidence. A well-balanced 
diet, sufficient rest, proper dress both 
indoors and out, all help to keep 
the body resistance high. Undue ex¬ 
posure to sharp changes in tem¬ 
perature should be avoided. Proper 
ventilation of rooms, with sufficient 
humidity in the air, helps to keep the 
mucous membranes in healthy con¬ 
dition. If humidifiers are not used, 
adequate moisture can be maintained 
by keeping a pan of water on a 
radiator or stove. Particular care 
should be taken to avoid contact with 
persons who have colds. Simple hy¬ 
gienic measures Uke washing the 
hands before eating or covering a 
sneeze ail help to decrease the oc¬ 
currence of colds. See also broncho- 


242 



COMMUI^iCABLE DISEASES 


CONCUSSION 


pneumonia; child care; otitis; 

SINUSES. 

COMMUNICABLE DISEASES, 
those which are transmissible from 
one person to another. The dMerence, 
often disregarded, between infections 
and communicable contagious dis¬ 
eases is that while infectious diseases 
are caused by the invasion of an 
infective agent like a fungus bacillus, 
or virus, the agents are not neces¬ 
sarily transmitted by a person. 

COMPOUND FRACTURE. The 
breaking of a bone is a fracture. In 
a compound fracture, the point of 
the fracture is in contact with the 
outer surface of the body—^for ex¬ 
ample, through a wound. If the 
break is covered by the skin, it is a 
simple fracture. See also bones; first 
aid; fractures. 

COMPRESS, a piece of folded gauze, 
cloth, or a soft pad which is applied 
firmly to a part of the body to relieve 
iniammations, produce pressure, or 
prevent hemorrhage. It may be wet 
or dry, hot or cold, and is sometimes 
perforated for drainage or observa¬ 
tion of the underlying skin. 

COMPULSION, defined in psychol¬ 
ogy as an irresistible, irrational de¬ 
sire to repeat certain acts. For ex¬ 
ample, a person may have the 
compulsion to wash his hands every 
few minutes, or to avoid stepping on 
the cracks in the sidewalk. 

CONCEPTION, the union of sperm 
and ovum, the male and female sex 
cells, leading to the development of a 
new life. Conception is sometimes 
called fertilization, impregnation, or 


fecundation, and should be distin¬ 
guished from the term copulation 
which refers to the act of sexual 
union between the male and female. 

Since the egg cell of the female 
lives for only about twelve hours out 
of every month, the male seed must 
be deposited within the female genital 
tract during these few hours, or 
within two or three days of re¬ 
lease of an egg. The sperm cells 
live about three days after ejacu¬ 
lation. 

Conception usually takes place 
within the Fallopian tubes adjacent 
to the uterus and ovaries, and may 
occur within an hour of intercourse. 
Following union of the male and 
female sex cells, development is 
rapid, and eight to fourteen days 
later the product imbeds itself in the 
lining of the uterus where it remains 
until birth. See also reproduction 
SYSTEM. 

CONCUSSION, a shock, severe shak¬ 
ing or jarring of a part of the body, 
usually resulting from a fall or blow. 
It also refers to the morbid state re¬ 
sulting from such a jarring. A con¬ 
cussion of the brain is actually a 
paralysis of its function, and symp¬ 
toms are not due to any fracture or 
laceration. Signs of hemorrhage or 
loss of blood from the coverings 
around the brain may be present. 
Sometimes disturbances occur in the 
circulation of spinal fluid through the 
brain, and occasionally part of the 
soft white material of the brain is 
crushed or the connection cords be¬ 
tween different portions of the brain 
are damaged or destroyed. 

Brain concussion itself is seldom 

243 



CONDITIONING 


CONDOM 


fatal. Necropsies (post-mortems) have 
shown that some apparent serious 
lesion of brain substance or vessels 
has occurred in fatal cases which 
had the characteristics of concussion 
but actually were contusions or 
lacerations. Whenever a concussion 
is suspected, a physician should be 
consulted. An x-ray examination 
should be made to determine 
whether or not fracture of the skull 
or other complications have occurred. 
While a slight crack of the skull is 
not critical, the pressure that may 
result from the bleeding inside the 
skull may be. 

Symptoms of concussion appear 
immediately after the injury and vary 
depending on the degree of injury. 
Probably there will be a severe ach¬ 
ing of the head, a weak dizzy 
“stunned” feeling. Disturbances in 
vision, cold perspiration, and shallow 
respiration may appear. If the jarring 
has been severe, more extreme symp¬ 
toms may develop at once. The 
victim may be in partial coma or 
unconscious. The body will be cold 
and respiration exceedingly weak. 
Often vomiting accompanies these 
symptoms. 

The consequences of a concussion 
may be of short duration ol: last 
for days or weeks or longer. Often, 
after regaining his senses, the person 
is unable to remember anything that 
happened during the time when con¬ 
sciousness was lost. Frequently 
symptoms of contusion and hemor¬ 
rhage may develop and with them 
serious brain injuries. When the 
symptoms are protracted, a more 
serious affliction is always suggested. 


During emergency treatment, the 
person should lie flat and be kept 
warm and quiet. Attempts at stim¬ 
ulation should not be made. No 
pressure should be applied or strong 
antiseptics given. See also head in¬ 
juries; shock:. 

CONDITIONING, the development 
of a better physiological condition 
through physical exercise and train¬ 
ing. 

A great football coach once said 
that “a true athlete developed from 
the inside out, from healthy blood 
circulation and healthy cells to 
healthy muscles and nerves.” Athletes 
are thus in “good condition,” if their 
whole body functions as well as it 
can. To reach this goal, good nutri¬ 
tion, exercise, fresh air, rest and 
sleep as well as other healthful habits 
must prevail. Athletic coaches check 
carefully on the weight of their 
charges and keep accurate records 
of their physical well being. Thus 
they can establish whether or not 
an athlete works out too much or 
needs additional assistance to get into 
top form. Psychologically condition¬ 
ing is the process of attaching a new 
stimulus to an old response, or a new 
response to an old stimulus. For 
example, in conditioning a dog to 
salivate at the sound of a beU, the 
salivation is an old response and the 
bell is the new stimulus which pro¬ 
vokes the response. 

CONDOM, a rubber sheath used to 
cover the penis during sexual inter¬ 
course to prevent the male sperm 
from reaching and fertilizing the 
female egg cell. It is a device for 


244 



COMJUMCIi¥lT!S 


COfsiSTiPATiON 


the prevention of infection as well as 
conception. See also contraception, 

CONJUNCTWITIS, inflammation 
of the conjiinctiva, the mucous 
membrane covering the globe and lids 
of the eye. Many types of conjunc¬ 
tivitis exists includijig allergic con- 
junctivitiSj catarrhal conjunctivitis, 
the most common form which usually 
results from irritation or a cold, and 
acute contagious conjunctivitis or 
pinkeye. See also pinkeye; eye. 

CONSTIPATION, the retention of 
solid waste material within the bowel 
for an unusually long time, or undue 
difficulty in its evacuation. 

The excretion of undigested residue 
is the jflnal step in the process of di¬ 
gestion. The waste material enters the 
colon as a loose moist mass, and there 
the excess water is absorbed by the 
body. The relatively solid mass of 
waste material then moves on into 
the rectum, where it normally 
prompts the desire for a movement of 
the bowels. 

Evacuation ordinarily occurs once 
or twice every twenty-four hours, 
with a wide range of variation among 
individuals. With some persons 
greater frequency is common, while 
with others an interval of several 
days may often pass without ill 
effect. A fixed schedule for this 
function for all persons is unknown. 
Most doctors believe that the nature 
of the action, which should, occur 
with some regularity and should pro¬ 
duce well-formed stools, neither too 
moist and loose nor too dry and hard, 
is more desirable than the frequency. 

Babies normally have three or four 


bowel movements a day, but the 
child who has less than three is not 
necessarily constipated. If the infant 
remains well and continues to gain 
weight, his digestion and elimination 
are probably normal for him. When 
constipation does occur, insufficient 
water, underfeeding, or an excessive 
amount of fat in the diet may be 
causative. Children who are weak or 
who have rickets may have difficulty 
in performing the necessary muscular 
actions associated with elimination. 

Constipation is often the result 
of faulty habits and improper train¬ 
ing. The habitual failure to respond 
promptly to the body’s signal is 
often a basic cause, A lazy attitude, 
poorly developed habits, false mod¬ 
esty, or other extraneous factors 
often create a situation in which 
the signal is at first ignored and later 
not even felt. When such a pattern 
has been established by a person, he 
may develop chronic constipation, 
which, as an adult, he will usually 
attribute not to the bad habits which 
are actually basic but to nonexistent 
organic causes, which he will attempt 
to remedy by laxatives, enemas, and 
irrigations. These in turn may disrupt 
and interfere with the normal process 
of elimination and thus intensify his 
problem still further. 

This type of constipation is com¬ 
monly complicated even more by 
intricate chains of habits and mis¬ 
conceptions. Some constipated per- 
sons develop elaborate and mistaken 
notions about the shape, color, fre¬ 
quency, time, and consistency of the 
evacuation. A first step in overcoming 
constipation of this sort, is to cor- 


245 



CONSTIPATION 


CONSTIPATION 


met these mistaken beliefs. There¬ 
after new habit patterns can be en¬ 
couraged. A baby can be trained so 
that the simple act of placing it on 
the pot causes evacuation. With 
adults the pattern becomes much 
more elaborate, and can include 
getting up, bathing, having breakfast, 
even having the right magazine and a 
cigarette. The principle nevertheless 
remains the same and the develop¬ 
ment of an effective habit pattern is 
often the most successful treatment 
for chronic constipation. 

Certain organic factors can, how¬ 
ever, be involved in this digestive 
disturbance. The diet must contain 
adequate amounts of essential ma¬ 
terials. The bulk must be sufficient to 
supply enough residual matter to 
assure an adequate mass and promote 
normal activity. Fruits and vegetables 
are best. Sufficient fluid intake is 
needed to prevent dehydration of the 
material in the colon and consequent 
difficulty in passing a dry mass. Pro¬ 
fuse sweating during hot weather or 
as part of an acute infection can so 
deplete the body’s supply of moisture 
as to react adversely on the bowel. 
Without adequate residue and mois¬ 
ture, the bowel does not function 
properly. 

Sometimes a defect of motor ac¬ 
tivity exists. Particularly in the aged 
and the undernourished, the intestinal 
wall may lose its tone and capacity. 
A lack of B complex vitamins may be 
involved. 

In some persons the nerves regu¬ 
lating the digestive processes are dis¬ 
turbed, so that the left half of the 
colon, its expelling section, does not 


function properly. Drugs are now 
available which overcome this con¬ 
dition. Other drugs which are given 
to combat certain conditions of dis¬ 
ease may interfere with the action of 
the bowel. The physician, however, 
can usually deal with such contin¬ 
gencies as they arise. 

The symptoms of constipation 
vary from few or none at all to a 
condition resembling a wasting dis¬ 
ease. Loss of appetite comes early 
and halitosis is likely. The person be¬ 
comes depressed and dull without 
apparent cause, tires easily, cannot 
cope with his responsibilities as usual, 
and may look pale and unwell. Fre¬ 
quent indigestion and discomfort or 
pain in the digestive system are 
common. 

The doctor can establish whether 
bad habits and overdosing with pur¬ 
gatives are responsible, or whether 
deep-seated organic disorders may be 
present. In any event, only the doctor 
can safely outline the measures to 
be followed. 

In most cases of dyschesia, or con¬ 
stipation involving largely the lower 
end of the digestive tract, actual 
re-education is necessary to start 
regularity and reliance on natural 
processes. Often, however, enemas, 
suppositories, or mild laxatives may 
be used to get new habits under way. 
Regular exercise is frequently advisa¬ 
ble, especially for a sedentary person. 
A walk before breakfast or daily ex¬ 
ercise of the abdominal muscles may 
be desirable. 

Along with re-education, an ade¬ 
quately varied diet is probably more 
significant than any other factor. The 


246 



CONTACT DERMATITIS 


CONTACT DEiMAIITIS 


major constituents of a normal diet, 
proteins, carbotiydrates, fats, mineral 
salts, vitamins, and sufficient indi- 
gestible bulk, should all be assured 
Fruit, especially stewed prunes and 
apples, are recommended for break¬ 
fast, and green vegetables and salad 
at both luncheon and the evening 
meal. Bran should be considered as 
a medicinal food, to be used only on 
the physician’s advice, because it 
seems to accomplish little more than 
other bulk foods and may be irritat¬ 
ing to the bowel. 

Many drugs are available for treat¬ 
ing various kinds of constipation. 
Vegetable and salt cathartics, organic 
and mineral medicines, substances 
which act mechanically, and water in 
various forms are among the most 
common. Cathartics of both the 
mineral and vegetable types irritate 
the bowel and are not advised for 
long use. They include the strong 
salts, cascara, jalap, senna, rhubarb, 
and aloes. Among the substances that 
act mechanically are mineral oil, 
bran, agar-agar, flax seeds, and psyl¬ 
lium seeds which lubricate the di¬ 
gestive tract or work by pushing its 
contents before them. Mixtures of 
mineral oil and such materials as 
agar-agar or flax seeds form a muci¬ 
laginous mass. Caution is necessary in 
using mineral oil because it absorbs 
vitamin A and may lead to a de¬ 
ficiency of that vitamin, and also be¬ 
cause of a tendency of mineral oil to 
leak out of the bowel, Phenolphthal- 
ein is the chief ingredient of many 
widely used laxative combinations. 

Recently attention has been given 
to methods of assisting the body it¬ 


self to prevent overdryness of the 
bowel. It the amount of bile dis¬ 
charged by the liver is increased, 
making it thinner and greater in 
volume, the contents of the bowel 
remain softer and evacuation is 
easier and more normal when there 
has previously been a difficulty with 
overdry elimination. Bile acids have 
been found to accomplish this better 
than bile salts, which doctors formerly 
gave, because they thin the bile in the 
liver and enable it to be secreted 
more profusely. This is a normal 
body process and advantageous when 
constipation must be treated. 

More than $50,000,000 a year is 
spent in the United States on con¬ 
stipation remedies. Cathartics, when 
taken habitually, end by defeating 
their purpose and may make elimina¬ 
tion more difficult rather than less 
difficult. Some have a useful function, 
but they are best prescribed by a 
doctor. 

CONTACT DERMATITIS, an in¬ 
flammation of the skin due to a 
sensitization to a substance with 
which it comes in contact. As a 
permanent injury to health, contact 
dermatitis is not a serious disturb¬ 
ance, but this minor allergy is per¬ 
sistent and often exceedingly annoy¬ 
ing. It affects all age groups from 
infants to old people. 

Whenever the skin is exposed to 
allergens, substances to which a per¬ 
son is sensitive, rashes, hives, cracks, 
burning, sores, and other Irritations 
may develop. A good example is 
poison ivy in which an itchy rash 
is produced on the skin through con- 


247 



CONTACT LENSES 


CONTACT LENSES 


tact with an oil in the poison ivy 
plant. 

The substances to which a sensitive 
person may react on touch are 
numerous and include plants, wood, 
fur, silk, wool, dye, resin, plastic, 
rubber, metal, and many more. Some 
women have cosmetic contact der¬ 
matitis and cannot use ordinary 
beauty products such as soap, 
bleaches, deodorants, or powder. The 
active reaction of the skin to an al¬ 
lergenic substance makes contact der¬ 
matitis an occupational disorder too, 
and it frequently affects industrial 
workers who are exposed to certain 
chemicals, wood, metal, glue, or 
lacquer. In some instances, skin dis¬ 
orders spread to the nail bed and 
produce a condition called onycholy¬ 
sis. Nails may become brittle, sepa¬ 
rate into layers, or fall out com¬ 
pletely. 

When symptoms of contact derma¬ 
titis apear, the cause should be de¬ 
termined. A physician may discover 
the source through a patch test as 
in other allergies and then proceed 
with special desensitization which is 
possible with a number of materials. 

CONTACT LENSES, eyeglasses that 
fit directly over the eyeball and fully 
aid the vision. A mold of the eye is 
made, exactly as one makes a cast 
of the inside of the mouth when it 
is necessary to have false teeth on 
plates. From this fragile mold a 
permanent one is made with dental 
plastic; then the gjass is modeled 
to fit the mold. The inner surface of 
the contact lens must fit the eyeball 
so that it will not injure the sensitive 


tissues or interfere with the circula¬ 
tion of the blood. Before the mold 
has been prepared, it is necessary to 
fit the contact lenses. This means that 
the eye must be studied by all of the 
usual methods in order to determine 
the diflBculties of vision so that the 

lens will meet its needs. 

The fitting of contact lenses is 

a procedure performed by experts m 
ophthalmology or optometry with the 
aid of the optician. In fitting the lens, 
the lids of the eye are separated by 
the thumb and forefinger of the left 
hand and the contact lens is then in¬ 
serted between the eyelids and the 
eyeball, usually first beneath the 
lower eyelid and then beneath the up¬ 
per. Special fluids are used in prepar¬ 
ing the eye for the lens and for helping 
the eye to become accustomed to its 
use. Preferably the contact lens must 
fit closely and any bubbles of fluid 
must be removed before it is consid¬ 
ered in suitable position. Once the 
lens is fitted correctly, the wearer 
must practice setting and removing 
the contact lens so that the placing of 
the lens and its retention become a 
habit. In developing this procedure, 
the optician who fits the lens is help¬ 
ful in observing the practice until it 
becomes perfect. 

Experiments have shown that the 
average person learns to insert the 
lenses in approximately nine min¬ 
utes. At first, these lenses are worn 
only an hour or two at a time, but 
many who become well accustomed 
to them wear their lenses six to eight 
hours. Several months may be re¬ 
quired, in some cases, before the 
person becomes sufficiently used to 


248 



CONTiACEPTiON 


COMTUSION 


contact lenses to be able to wear 
them a long time without removing 
them and refilling them with fluid, 
and also without resting the eyes. 

CONTRACEPTION, the use of a 
device, substance, or method to pre¬ 
vent conception during sexual inter¬ 
course. 

Perhaps the commonest of the 
various methods of contraception 
are the use of the sheath or condom 
of rubber worn by the man and, 
alternatively, the pessary or dia¬ 
phragm worn by the woman. Chemi¬ 
cals, especially fixed in thick creams, 
which destroy or immobilize the 
sperm cell are also used. The Ameri¬ 
can Medical Association has listed a 
number of such creams by name, as 
acceptable when prescribed by the 
doctor. 

The physician’s advice as to the 
proper use of such devices, materials, 
and methods is desirable, since not 
all are of equal effectiveness. The 
combination of pessary and cream, 
for instance, is probably 90 per cent 
or more effective; none is 100 per 
cent reliable. The pessary must be 
prescribed and fitted for the woman 
by the physician; otherwise, at best, 
its use will be haphazard protection. 
Creams and other chemicals are safe 
only on the advice of a physician. 
The use of douches is also common, 
but if they are to be effective and 
safe, should be employed only with 
medical advice. Many cleansing or 
sterilizmg agents are dangerous to the 
body, or may alter normal bacterial 
growth undesirably in the parts where 
they are used. 


Another method of avoiding con¬ 
ception is the so-called rhythm tech¬ 
nique. The basis for this theory is 
the regular monthly cycle of ovula¬ 
tion. An egg cell or ovum passes 
from the ovary once every month, 
and consequently during the month 
the woman is more likely to conceive 
at one time than another. These in¬ 
tervals are commonly referred to 
respectively as the fertile and the safe 
periods. For the woman who men¬ 
struates regularly every twenty-eight 
days, the safe period is calculated as 
approximately a week before and a 
week after menstruation. More ex¬ 
actly, it lasts nine days, beginning 
the first day of menstruation. The 
fertile period, which normally is a 
maximum of eight days, follows, and 
then the next eleven days are again 
“safe.” When the menstrual interval 
is shorter or longer than this, or is 
irregular, the physician’s advice is 
desirable. 

Another way of identifying the 
fertile period is to record the morning 
temperature, before any food is eaten 
or water or other fluids are drunk. 
Ovulation brings with it a fall in 
temperature, then a rise. Abstinence 
is practiced during the period of 
ovulation, and for three days before 
and three days after. 

The latest development is a steroid 
called Enovid which prohibits ovula¬ 
tion. Five days after the cessation of 
menstruation a pill is taken each day 
for twenty days. The product is also 
useful in various menstTual disturb¬ 
ances, 

CONTUSION, a superficial injury 

249 



CONVALESCENCE 


CONVALESCENCE 


or bruise, produced by impact, in 
which breaking of the skin does not 
occur. If the skin is punctured also, 
the term contused wound is used. 
See also BRUISES. 

CONVALESCENCE, the period of 
gradual restoration to health follow¬ 
ing disease, injury, or operation. 

During convalescence, it is partic¬ 
ularly important that the patient 
receive a well-balanced diet. To en¬ 
courage strong scar tissue to form 
and seal over a surgical incision, a 
high vitamin C level is required. 
Often after illness or surgery, the per¬ 
son may be anemic. To counteract 
anemia, which reduces the healing 
power, the diet should be rich in 
iron. Also important is protein, the 
building material of the body. The 
digestive tract may be sluggish at 
first, so food should be bland and 
low in residue to avoid overtaxing the 
digestive tract. 

After diarrhea or infections of the 
intestines, clear fluids, such as soup, 
tea, juice, and plenty of water, 
should make up the bulk of the diet. 
Gradually the patient may take soft 
solids, such as eggs, toast, and cus¬ 
tards. 

Formerly a sick person was kept 
in bed for a long period of time. 
Physicians now tend to feel that 
fairly early ambulation or walking is 
beneficial in speeding convalescence. 
Getting out of bed as soon as possible 
prevents dangerous blood clots in 
the legs and also boosts the spirits. 
However, just that a patient feels 
better does not mean the, body is fully 
healed, and the physician should be 
consulted before increased activity 


is permitted. Damage to heart, kid¬ 
neys, and other vital organs can 
result from overactivity following in¬ 
fectious diseases. As soon as possible, 
the patient should be permitted to sit 
in the sun and have fresh air. Visitors, 
provided they are not too frequent or 
the visits too long, are good for the 
patient’s morale. Of course, persons 
with colds or other illnesses should 
never be permitted to see the patient. 

Some persons appear to enjoy be¬ 
ing invalids, an attitude which is 
enhanced by oversolicitous and over- 
sympathetic friends and family. The 
convalescent person should begin to 
do things for himself, to engage in 
intellectually stimulating activities, 
and to plan for return to his regular 
life as soon as possible. 

During convalescence, the temper¬ 
ature is taken daily, preferably in 
the morning. Until the person is able 
to take a shower or bath, he receives 
a daily sponge bath in bed by a 
qualified person. The room should be 
warm during the time of the bath and 
only a small part of the body exposed 
at a time. After the bath, the bed 
linen should be changed, makin g sure 
that the linen fits snugly on the bed 
without wrinkles which can irritate 
the skin of the bedridden patient. Al¬ 
though shampooing the hair is gener¬ 
ally permissible in most illnesses, it 
is best to check first with the doctor. 

A person who has been in bed 
for a long period of time will be 
weak when he first gets up, so be¬ 
fore getting out of bed for the first 
time it is best for him to spend a 
few minutes each day sitting on the 
edge of his bed. Next he can be 


250 



CONVULSION 


COiNEA 


assisted to a chair placed next to 
the bed where he may remain for 
a short time. Someone should al¬ 
ways help him the first few times he 
attempts to walk. If dizziness occurs, 
he should return to bed at once and 
try again later. 

Constipation often occurs m bed¬ 
ridden persons. Generally the phy¬ 
sician will prescribe a mild cathartic 
Enemas should not be given without 
consulting the doctor. See also bed 

SORES. 

CONVULSION, an involuntary gen¬ 
eral attack of muscle contraction. In 
a tonic convulsion, the contractions 
occur without relaxation; and in a 
clonic convulsion, alternate contrac¬ 
tions of opposing groups of muscles 
take place. The convulsion may or 
may not be accompanied by uncon¬ 
sciousness. The word fit commonly 
denotes an attack of convulsions. 

Convulsions occur in epilepsy, 
asphyxia, poisoning, lockjaw, hydro¬ 
phobia, apoplexy, meningitis, head 
injuries, nutritional deficiency, in¬ 
herited tendency, and in slow-pulse 
diseases such as anemia of the brain. 
They may also appear, together with 
subsequent coma, as a disturbance of 
late pregnancy. Convulsion in infants 
is sometimes a reflex action connected 
with teething, indigestion, rickets, 
worms, diarrhea, breath holding, an 
emotional habit which some children 
develop, and, in particular, high 
fever, as in tonsillitis. When the con¬ 
vulsion is not brought on by high 
fever, it may be longer and more 
serious. Infant mortality rate from 
convulsions has dropped sharply; in 


1900 , 1 out of 1,000 births resulted 
in death from convulsions; in 1948, 
the figure had been reduced to 1 in 
10 , 000 , due mainly to advances in 

the care of infants. 

Although convulsions are often 
frightening, especially in children, it 
should be remembered that a con¬ 
vulsion itself is not fatal. The patient 
should be prevented from injuring 
himself, but any use of force kept to 
an absolute minimum. A piece of 
wood placed between the teeth will 
keep the patient from biting himself. 
His clothes should be loosened, es¬ 
pecially around the neck and across 
the chest, and he should be placed 
on his back, unless he vomits, in 
which case he is placed on his side. 
As the patient recovers, an effort 
should be made to communicate with 
him and to reassure him. See also 
CHILD care; eclampsia; epilepsy. 

COPPER SULPHATE, bluish crys¬ 
tals or powder soluble in water, used 
in swimming pools to destroy fungi 
or bacteria. In medicine it is bene¬ 
ficial as an astringent and as an agent 
to induce vomiting. 

COPULATION, a technical term for 
sexual intercourse. See also repro¬ 
duction SYSTEM. 

CORNEA, the tough transparent 
membrane in front of the eyeball. It 
occupies about one-sixth of the cir¬ 
cumference of the globe of the eye 
and acts as a kind of magnifying and 
protective lens for the eye. Various 
disorders of the cornea result in seri¬ 
ous visual defects. 

Astigmatism, or blurred vision, 

251 



CORNEAL TRANSPLANTATION 

may occur when the central part of 
the cornea is more curved in one spot 
than in another. Light rays are thus 
not equally refracted and bent and 
some of them are focused on the 
retina and others in front or behind 
it. 

If the cornea is too thin or exceed¬ 
ingly weak, a protrusion or bulge 
may develop and produce a condition 
called keratoconus. Vision will be¬ 
come increasingly dim as the cornea 
changes, and corneal transplantation 
may be necessary to restore sight. 

Interstitial keratitis is an inflamma¬ 
tion in which the entire cornea be¬ 
comes hazy and almost completely 
covers the iris. Persons with con¬ 
genital syphilis are often affected. 

Traumatic keratitis is a conse¬ 
quence of wounds or injuries of the 
cornea. Even slight injuries may re¬ 
sult in an inflammation which im¬ 
pairs vision. During the healing proc¬ 
ess of more severe injuries, opaque 
scar tissue may develop instead of 
clear comeal tissue and a curtain is 
drawn over the pupil of the eye, re¬ 
sulting in partial or total blindness. 

CORNEAL TRANSPLANTATION, 
an operation in which a section of 
clear transparent cornea is substituted 
in places where opaque cornea has 
been removed. Comeal tissue is re¬ 
moved from the healthy eyes of per¬ 
sons immediately after death and 
shipped by air to “eye banks,” where 
doctors can use the tissue as needed. 
The tissue must be used within 
thirty-six hours after its removal. 

Comeal transplantation has been 
perfected and now brings great hope 
of restored vision to those blinded by 


CORONARY THROMBOSIS 

corneal disorders. However, the suc¬ 
cess of comeal transplantations pre¬ 
supposes certain conditions. For ex¬ 
ample, the operation is rarely suc¬ 
cessful when the whole expanse of 
the cornea has been affected, and it 
is not attempted in cases of opaque 
corneas at birth. Other components 
of the eye must be in good condition; 
certain diseases of the eye, such as 
glaucoma, must first be eliminated 
before the operation. 

CORONARY THROMBOSIS, a 
rather loose term for a condition 
more accurately described as acute 
coronary occlusion or blocking of a 
coronary artery of the heart. This 
means that a clot of blood has formed 
within the heart or blood vessels, 
usually due to a slowing of the 
circulation or to alteration of the 
blood or vessel walls. The ability of 
the heart to function efficiently de¬ 
pends primarily on the state of the 
heart muscle’Or myocardium; thus, 
life itself depends largely on the state 
of the blood vessels which bring 
nourishment to the myocardium. 
These blood vessels are known as the 
coronary arteries. 

Blocking or occlusion of a coro¬ 
nary artery may develop rapidly or 
slowly, and coronary disease may be 
mild or severe, sudden and fatal. If 
it develops slowly, the myocardium is 
gradually deprived of its blood supply 
and cannot function efficiently. The 
condition manifests itself as angina 
pectoris which is characterized by 
pain under the breastbone, produced 
by exertion and relieved by rest. 

If the occlusion occurs rapidly as 


252 



CORONARY THROMBOSIS 


CORONARY THROMBOSIS 


in acute coronary occlusion, one of 
two things may happen. Sudden 
death may result if the blocking in¬ 
volves a large artery or occurs in an 
already damaged myocardium. If a 
smaller branch of the coronary arter¬ 
ies is obstructed, the chances are 
good that the person will recover. 

The primary cause of coronary 
artery disease, and therefore coronary 
thrombosis, is unknown, but is proba¬ 
bly the same as that of arteriosclero¬ 
sis, which is also not known. In a 
majority of cases, coronary throm¬ 
bosis occurs in a coronary artery that 
has become thickened and hardened, 
or sclerosed, so that its channel is 
gradually narrowed. When this nar¬ 
rowing reaches a certain stage, the 
blood in that channel is liable to clot 
and completely block the artery, 
thereby depriviog the heart muscle 
supplied by this artery of its blood 
supply. This hardening process, or 
arteriosclerosis, is similar to that 
which occurs in arteries in any part 
of the body. 

Coronary thrombosis is chiefly a 
disease of middle life, being relatively 
rare under the age of forty, and is 
more common in men than in women. 
It is found more frequently among 
professional workers than manual 
workers. In many instances, the 
victims are active high-strung people. 
Mental and emotional stress may pre¬ 
cede attacks and persons with angina 
pectoris, high blood pressure, arteri¬ 
osclerosis, nephritis, or syphilis are 
particularly disposed to coronary 
thrombosis. 

Research or prevention of coronary 
thrombosis has established a link be¬ 


tween the disease and a high level of 
cholesterol, a fatty substance in the 
blood that tends to clog the arteries. 
Some nutrition authorities and heart 
specialists urge that every adult male, 
particularly if he is obese and has a 
family history of heart disease, have 
a periodic cholesterol test. When the 
cholesterol level goes above the 
safety point, coronary thrombosis is 
more likely to occur. In the usual 
course of coronary thrombosis, the 
person, even at rest, is suddenly 
seized with excruciating pain over 
the heart, which rapidly spreads all 
over the front of the chest and 
sometimes down over the abdomen. 
Often the person will collapse. If 
efficient treatment is available, this 
alarming condition gradually im¬ 
proves, but even in the mildest cases 
a period of at least t hree weeks’ but 
preferably six weeks’ rest in bed is 
considered essential before activities 
are resumed. 

In the diagnosis of coronary throm¬ 
bosis, electrocardiography is signif¬ 
icant. The electrocardiograph is an 
instrument which records the electri¬ 
cal activity of the heart by attaching 
electric wires to the limbs and chest 
wall of the patient and then record¬ 
ing the heart impulse on photo¬ 
graphic paper. When a coronary 
artery is occluded, the part of the 
heart muscle supplied by the ob¬ 
structed artery is no longer able to 
transmit the impulse, and therefore 
an abnormal record is obtained. Oc¬ 
clusion of either of the two main 
coronary arteries produces a charac¬ 
teristic record. 

Until the true underlying cause of 

253 



COSTISOME 


COSMETICS 


coronary thrombosis is known, treat¬ 
ment consists in resting the heart as 
much as possible. The area of the 
heart muscle, deprived of its vital 
blood supply by the obstruction of the 
coronary artery, degenerates. If this 
degenerative process proceeds too far, 
the weakened area may rupture, 
which means death, or the process of 
healing may be so unsatisfactory 
that the normal muscle is replaced by 
fibrous tissues, a poor substitute 
for active muscle tissue. Therefore 
the heart is permanently crippled. 

One of the most interesting re¬ 
parative processes in the human body 
occurs when an artery is blocked. 
Junctions, anastomoses, develop be¬ 
tween the occluded artery above the 
site of obstruction and neighboring 
arteries, so that in time the area, 
originally supplied solely by the oc¬ 
cluded artery, is ultimately supplied 
by neighboring arteries. In some cases 
this brings the blood supply of the 
affected area back to normal, while 
in others an adequate supply is main¬ 
tained even though it is less than it 
was originally. This explains why rest 
is so essential in coronary thrombosis. 

Fluid is usually restricted, and a 
diet of not more than 800 to 900 
calories per day is prescribed. Ex¬ 
ceedingly difficult breathing may be 
relieved by oxygen. Formation of 
blood clots may be decreased or pro¬ 
longed by the drug dicumarol, or 
with other anticoagulants. Some sur¬ 
gical procedures are being tried ex¬ 
perimentally. See also heart. 

CORTISONE^ a highly complex 
chemical which is a constituent of 
adrenal cortical extract. Its formula 


is known, but the chief available basic 
source is the gallbladder Juice of 
cattle. ACTH, not a synthetic like 
cortisone, is secreted by the pituitary 
glands of hogs. 

Hydrocortisone, a derivative, has 
been found more effective than corti¬ 
sone for local applications, such as 
to the skin, or for direct injection into 
joint cavities. These drugs are not 
a cure for disease; they only relieve 
and suppress its manifestations. 

New preparations have been 
developed more effective than corti¬ 
sone without such side effects as 
disturbance of the water-salt balance. 
Among them are predmisolone, Meti- 
cortin, Kenacort, Aristocort, Deca- 
dron, and others. 

Cortisone, quickly absorbed in the 
alimentary canal, is converted into 
hydrocortisone in the body and is 
thus a substitute for the natural 
hormone. It is used in certain acute 
conditions, such as the collagen dis¬ 
eases including rheumatic fever, 
rheumatoid arthritis, and polyarteri¬ 
tis. Corticotropin or ACTH stimu¬ 
lates the adrenal cortex to increase 
hydrocortisone production. An intact 
adrenal cortex must be present for 
ACTH to take effect. See also acth. 

CORYZA, an inflammation of the 
mucous membranes of the nose, 
characterized by sneezing, discharge 
of watery mucus, and watering of 
the eyes. Translated from its original 
Greek, coryza means a ^*mnning at 
the nose.” The term is used as a 
synonym for head cold, and hay 
fever is also called allergic coryza. 

COSMETICS, preparations intended 


254 



COSMETICS 


COSMETICS 


to beautify the skin, hair, and face. 
The American public spends almost 
a billion dollars on cosmetics each 
year and cosmetic manufacture is 
among the top twenty industries. The 
use of cosmetics has a long history. 
Four thousand years ago Egyptian 
women sought to beautify themselves 
in ways that would be familiar to the 
woman of today—with creams, oils, 
eye makeup. An Egyptian manu¬ 
script of 1200 B.c. gives treatments 
for gray hair, baldness, and moles. 
In ancient Rome, dyeing and bleach¬ 
ing hair was common. Honey and 
barley were reputed to be good skin 
softeners, and preparations purport¬ 
ing to tighten skin and remove 
wrinkles were available. Breasts were 
padded, superfluous hair removed, 
and skin powdered. 

Women of today employ a wide 
range of cosmetic products and treat¬ 
ments. Face powder is used by most 
American women. Its practical pur¬ 
pose is to protect the skin against the 
weather, absorb moisture, cool, re¬ 
lieve irritation, and provide a faint 
pleasant odor. Esthetically it elimi¬ 
nates the shiny appearance of the 
skin which women regard unfavora¬ 
bly. 

In the past face powder has been 
composed of various ingredients: 
vegetable powders of rice, wheat, and 
corn flour, acadia and tragacanth; 
mineral powders of chalk, talc, 
kaolin, magnesium carbonate, bis¬ 
muth nitrate, or carbonate and zinc 
oxide, with orris root frequently used 
to fix them. Today most face powder 
on the market is a combination of 


finely pulverized chalky minerals, 
fatty acids, and soaps blended with 
perfume and coloring matter. Face 
powder is more absorbent and ad¬ 
heres more evenly to the skin’s sur¬ 
face than toilet powders which con¬ 
tain a large proportion of inert 
substances such as talc, boric acid, 
zinc stearate, and perfume and are 
designed primarily to absorb moisture 
and perfume the body. For example, 
talcum powder, developed in this 
country in the 1890s as a protection 
against the weather, is magnesium 
silicate, slightly perfumed. Rouge is 
merely powder to which coloring 
matter and binders have been added. 
In the cream rouges, the coloring is 
in the waxes and oils. 

Powder and rouge do coat the 
pores, but if used reasonably should 
not cause any particular enlarge¬ 
ment. Pores are openings which are 
normally almost closed and occasion¬ 
ally open. With the passage of years, 
some elasticity is lost in these struc¬ 
tures and they fail to close as com¬ 
pletely as they once did, so that some 
enlargement of the pores is noted. 
The danger, although slight, in the 
use of face powder may be an allergic 
reaction to some substance in the 
powder. Some people are especially 
sensitive to orris root, now rarely 
used, and the use of face powders 
with this ingredient may cause sneez¬ 
ing, eruptions, eye inflammations, 
asthma, or hay fever. 

Creams and lotions are another 
part of the modern woman’s toilette. 
Galen, one of the fathers of modem 
medicine who lived about 1800 
years ago, developed the first formula 

255 



COSMETICS 


COSMETICS 


for cold cream. It consisted of four 
ounces of white wax and a pound 
of oil of roses mixed with some water 
and per<iimed. Today the creams do 
not differ radically from Galen’s 
cream. They usually consist of min¬ 
eral or vegetable oil, water in an 
emulsion brought about by the action 
of beeswax and borax, triethylamine, 
alkali stearates or a lanolin alcohol 
such as cholesterol. At one time some 
creams contained dangerous salts of 
lead or mercury. 

Most dermatologists, or skin spe¬ 
cialists, feel that creams are beneficial 
in cases of exceedingly dry skin and 
may help protect against chapping, 
cracking, and roughness, or soften 
lines and wrinkles, but not, however, 
prevent or eliminate them. In the 
application of cream, the face is usu¬ 
ally massaged and, especially if heat 
is applied, a temporary swelling of 
the skin surface may occur with an 
ostensible closure of the pores; as 
a result, the skin may feel tempo¬ 
rarily smoother and softer. Since the 
skin is a living tissue with certain 
automatic powers of regeneration, 
any improvement in its circulation 
will improve its condition. Proper 
diet and hygiene is the best way to 
encourage circulation and a good 
skin condition. Wrinkling is essen¬ 
tially due to a gradual loss of the 
elasticity of the connective tissues 
underlying the skin, which creams 
and lotions cannot correct. No 
method has been found for restoring 
elasticity to connective tissue. Face 
lifting does not do this; all that it 
accomplishes is a temporary smooth¬ 
ing by removal of a portion of the 


sagging skin, a process similar to 
taking a tuck in a loose dress. 

Face creams can be useful as 
cleansing agents, but creams adver¬ 
tised as “skin foods” and “tissue 
builders” have no proven value. 
There is no evidence that vitamins 
can be absorbed into the skin to 
nourish it. The skin, like all other 
tissue in the body, must be nourished 
by food eaten, digested, and ab¬ 
sorbed into the circulation. 

Weight-reducing creams are also 
worthless for the purpose claimed, 
and creams promising to “rejuvenate” 
the skin are no better than any other 
cream. Hormone face creams, which 
contain estrogen, the female sex hor¬ 
mone, have been the subject of much 
discussion. Actually, if there is 
enough estrogen in the cream to re¬ 
store elasticity to the skin, its use 
may be dangerous; if there is not 
enough to produce such an effect 
the preparation is misleading. So far 
it would appear that the creams avail¬ 
able supply insignificant quantities of 
the hormone in comparison with 
medically recognized therapeutic 
doses. As yet there is no conclusive 
evidence that harm has resulted from 
their use although large doses of 
estrogen may disturb the menstrual 
cycle. 

Vanishing creams are not entirely 
greaseless and usually contain potas¬ 
sium or sodium stearate and a little 
glycerin, plus some lanolin and min¬ 
eral oil. The value of these creams is 
that in being rubbed in they serve as 
a slight massage which increases the 
blood supply to the face and produces 
a temporary filling-out effect. 


256 



COSMETICS 


COSMETICS 


Particularly dangerous are re¬ 
movers for wrinkles, freckles, moles, 
and warts, and bleaches and sVm 
peels. Astringent substances produce 
a slight and temporary contraction 
of the cells aroimd the pores but can¬ 
not remove wrinkles. Moreover, 
strong astringents should not be ap¬ 
plied to the face. Egg white prepara¬ 
tions have been made which stiffen 
the skin and give the impression that 
the skin is being straightened al¬ 
though actually it isn’t. 

Bleach creams have contained am- 
moniated mercury which acts as an 
-imtant^d speeds the peeling of the 
outer layer of the skin. They may 
have some bleaching effect, but can¬ 
not affect skin blemishes of internal 
origin. Furthermore, such bleaches 
can be injurious if applied exces¬ 
sively, too often, or to broken skin 
surfaces. Liver spots cannot be re¬ 
moved by bleach creams. 

Freckles are pigmented areas of 
skin and freckle removers are de¬ 
signed to peel the skin slowly. The 
danger is that any preparation strong 
enough to remove this pigmentation 
may be strong enough to affect under¬ 
lying tissues. Skin peels cannot re¬ 
move skin blemishes of mtemal ori¬ 
gin, and in addition often contain 
salicylic acid, resorcin, arsenic, and 
carbolic acid, any one of which may 
be dangerous to tender skin. Mole 
removers also generally contain a 
caustic which, again, if strong enough 
to destroy a mole can also damage 
surrounding tissue. The primary 
danger here is that every mole is a 
potential site of skin cancer which an 
irritant, such as a mole-remover 


preparation, can excite to malig¬ 
nancy. The only wise course in treat¬ 
ing skin blemishes of any kind is to 
consult a physician, preferably a skin 
specialist or dermatologist. In the in¬ 
terim, harmless preparations are 
available which can be applied as a 
cover or a base for powder to dimm¬ 
ish or conceal the defect. 

Although occasionally women may 
be sensitive to dyes in rouges, lip¬ 
sticks, or creams, more commonly a 
sensitivity exists to dyes for hair, eye¬ 
lashes, and eyebrows. Practically all 
effective dyes contain ingredients 
that may be poisonous to some peo¬ 
ple, and may have effects ranging 
from serious eye injuries, skin inflam¬ 
mation, infection, chronic poisoning, 
and ulceration to baldness, fragility 
of hair, and loss of hair luster. Dyes 
which are completely harmless, the 
vegetable dyes such as henna or in¬ 
digo, are also relatively ineffective. 
The metallic salts used in metallic 
dyes vary greatly in harmfulness. 
Bismuth and mercury are highly 
toxic. Dyes of the lead sulphur type 
may be poisonous and should not be 
used if there is a break in the scalp. 
Caution should also be taken against 
oral contact. Dyes containing a large 
proportion of copper salts can be 
poisonous, although dyes in current 
use contain only a minute amount of 
copper salts. Silver nitrate is less 
dangerous, but dyes containing it can 
produce skin irritations or blackened 
skin patches. Dyes containing pyro- 
gallol, with metallic salts such as the 
sulphates of copper or iron, can irri¬ 
tate or poison. Metallic dyes act 
slowly, and do not penetrate the hair 


257 



COyGH 


COUGH 


shaft but deposit a coating on the 
outside of the hair* For this reason, 
such preparations have sometimes 
been advertised as "‘hair-color re¬ 
storers/' but in general they reduce 
the tensile strength of the hair and 
tend to rub off, sometimes staining 
the scalp. 

Aniline-derivative dyes, organic 
chemicals made from coal tar, act 
quickly and penetrate within the hair, 
and do not rub off or stain the scalp. 
Their danger is a tendency to produce 
dermatitis in some sensitive people 
and pave the way for serious infec¬ 
tion. Some aniline-derivative dyes are 
safe as they are essentially nontoxic 
and nonsensitizmg, but as a precau¬ 
tion a preliminary patch test is ad¬ 
visable before using them. This test 
should be repeated before each appli¬ 
cation since a person can be insensi¬ 
tive at one time and sensitive at an¬ 
other. 

Dye should never be used for eye¬ 
lashes and eyebrows. Mascaras or 
colorings with a carbon black base 
are harmless but preparations of ani¬ 
line origin or metallic salt, particu¬ 
larly the former, can cause serious 
injury to the eyes if carelessly ap¬ 
plied. 

Chemical depilatories should be 
used with great caution since any 
substance capable of dissolving hair 
can also injure or irritate the skin. 
Even though a substance is safe for 
most people, there may be a few who 
are sensitive to it. 

If reactions to cosmetics are ap¬ 
parent, a physician may diagnose the 
condition as allergic and try to dis¬ 
cover the causative agent. Often this 

255 


involves a patch test, the application 
of preparations to a sensitive part of 
the skin which is then covered with 
gauze. At the end of twenty-four 
hours, if no irritation or eruption is 
evident, the cosmetic can probably 
be used safely. Cosmetic manufac¬ 
turers now produce a complete line 
of preparations designed for sensitive 
and allergic people. See also depila¬ 
tory. 

COUGH, a sudden violent expulsion 
of air after deep inspiration and clo¬ 
sure of the glottis, the free margins 
of the vocal chords. It is a symptom 
rather than a disease itself. The most 
common cause of cough is irritation 
or inflammation of the delicate lining 
of the bronchial tubes or other parts 
of the respiratory apparatus. A for¬ 
eign substance, allergy from inhaled 
substances, tumors of the lungs, or 
nervous disease may all cause a 
cough. The purpose of the cough is 
protective. The body tries by cough¬ 
ing to remove the irritation or ob¬ 
struction from the breathing pas¬ 
sages. Since coughing may spread 
germs it is advisable to cover the 
mouth and nose with a tissue or hand¬ 
kerchief when coughing. Coughing 
may occur in an asthmatic attack 
when the passageways of the lungs 
are constricted or narrowed. 

By listening to the chest with a 
stethoscope, a physician may detect 
signs of mucus within the chest or 
abnormalities of breathing which 
point to localization of an obstruction 
or infection in the chest. X-rays also 
detect obstructions or inflammations 



CiAB LICE 


CRAMPS 


of the chest which produce coughing. 
Tuberculosis or silicosis and other 
diseases which cause scarring in the 
lungs may aggravate coughing, and a 
cough is especially apt to occur in 
certain diseases such as whooping 
cough. A cough may persist as a 
habit after the infection has been 
eradicated. 

Any cough should be taken seri- 
ously^ especially one which continues 
longer than two or three weeks or 
outlives the cold it originally accom¬ 
panied. In such cases, the doctor 
usually examines the sputum to deter¬ 
mine the nature of the infection caus¬ 
ing the cough, or takes x-rays for 
signs of tumors. If simple infection is 
causing the cough, it should be 
thoroughly treated; an infection in¬ 
completely treated can lead to perma¬ 
nent lung damage. Surgery may be in¬ 
dicated when there is evidence of 
tumor growth, or special treatment 
in the case of tuberculosis. 

Simple coughs are often relieved 
by medications designed to lessen 
phlegm within the bronchial passage¬ 
ways and to relieve muscle tension 
there. Inhalation of steam also loos¬ 
ens phlegm which can then be ex¬ 
pelled by coughing. Hot drinks will 
relax lung tissues. Smoking and dusty 
atmospheres are irritating to these 
sensitive tissues and should be 
avoided. Allergic coughs can be re¬ 
lieved by antihistamines, but detec¬ 
tion and treatment of the source of 
the cough is necessary for long-range 
benefit. 

CRAB LICE, the body lice which at¬ 


tach themselves to the hair of the 
groin and also to underarm hair, eye¬ 
lashes, and eyebrows. They aie 
square in shape with legs well devel¬ 
oped and adapted to clingiiig. This 
parasite feeds from the skin near the 
hair to which it clings, leaving pin¬ 
point marks on the skin and causing 
severe itching. Phthirius pubis, the 
species which infests man, is ordi¬ 
narily limited to the pubic region 
and is usually spread by direct per¬ 
sonal contact. The female of the 
species, considerably larger than the 
male, lays eggs, ten to fifteen at a 
time, attaching them to hair at the 
site of contagion, and continues to 
lay eggs for fourteen days or until 
her death. The eggs hatch in about a 
week and there are three moultings 
m a period of about two weeks. 
Formerly diiSicult to eradicate, crab 
lice now succumb quickly to applica¬ 
tions of DDT and other chemicals 
and ointments in a form suitable for 
application to the pubic area. These 
are obtainable by prescription. The 
venerable standard blue ointment is 
also satisfactory. See also lice. 

CRAMPS, sudden involuntary con¬ 
traction of a muscle, or of a group 
of muscles. 

Cramps in the calf of the leg, oc¬ 
curring especially during sleep, are 
frequent. They may be relieved by 
forcibly bending the knee as far as it 
will go, so that the muscular contrac¬ 
tion can be released. The muscle 
should then be vigorously rubbed. 

Nocturnal leg cramps in anemic 
girls sometimes occur because the leg 
is not receiving sufficient blood. How- 

259 



CRETINISM 


CROSS MATCHING OF BLOOD 


ever, the Sow of biood to the legs 
Will be increased if the person af“ 
fected will get out of bed and stand 
up bnefiy until the pain departs. 

Cramps of the stomach are much 
more pamful and common than leg 
cramps. Application of heat is often 
beneficial and sometimes a drag to 
expel the gas from the stomach may 
be helpful. One teaspoon of bicar¬ 
bonate of soda mixed with soda 
water, peppermint water, or plain 
water may be used for this purpose. 
The possibility of appendicitis 
should always be considered with 
abdominal cramps. If the cramps are 
not relieved within a reasonable time, 
a physician should be called. 

When stomach cramps occur dur¬ 
ing the first day of a woman’s men¬ 
strual period, the application of heat 
will often afford relief. Various drugs 
beneficial in relieving these cramps 
are now available. A woman who 
suffers persistently and severely from 
this type of cramp, however, should 
consult her doctor. See also abdomi¬ 
nal pain; appendicitis; colic; 

DYSMENORRHEA. 

CRETINISM, a condition originating 
during fetal life or early infancy 
in which mental and physical de¬ 
velopment are stunted due to a severe 
thyroid deficiency. 

The cretin may appear normal at 
birth, but Ms mental and physical 
deficiency usually becomes quite ob¬ 
vious during the first year. Character¬ 
istic symptoms of cretinism are rough 
dry skin, a distended abdomen, a 
protruding swollen tongue, apathy, 
and stolidity. 


In many cases, regular administra¬ 
tion of thyroid extract in early life 
has helped to improve the condition, 
but the treatment must be prolonged 
or even permanent. 

Cretinism is more common in re¬ 
gions where endemic goiter is severe; 
otherwise it occurs sporadically. 

moss MATCHING OF BLOOD, 
the technique used to determine be¬ 
fore a transfusion whether or not the 
blood to be given to a patient wil 
mix safely with Ms own blood. Not 
all human blood is the same and 
death can occur if cross matching is 
not accurately done. 

Cross matcMng of blood deals 
specifically with the oxygen-carrying 
cells in the blood stream wMch are 
the erythrocytes or red blood cells. A 
deficiency of red blood cells causes 
anemia when hemorrhage occurs and 
is dangerous because the body does 
not have enough cells to carry oxy¬ 
gen to primary structures such as the 
brain and kidneys. 

The four main groups of red blood 
cells, discovered by Landsteiner in 
1900, are A, B, AB, and O. A person 
develops a certain type of cells 
through heredity just as he inherits 
blond hair or blue eyes. In addition, 
each cell may carry a second factor 
called the Rh factor, present in 85 
per cent of the population. The ab¬ 
sence of the Rh factor is caUed Rh 
negative. Therefore, blood may be 
grouped as A-Rh positive, A-Rh 
negative, B-Rh positive, B-Rh nega¬ 
tive, AB-Rh positive, AB-Rh nega¬ 
tive, 0-Rh positive, and O-Rh nega¬ 
tive. 


260 



CROUP 


CROUP 


During cross matching, several 
drops of the blood cells are mixed 
with blood from the donor, warmed 
in an incubator to simulate body con¬ 
ditions, and examined under the 
microscope to detect any tendency to 
form a clot or mix poorly. M this 
happens, the two bloods are said to 
be incompatible. Typing of blood 
cells requires only a few minutes 
and cross matching about an hour. 
See also BLOOD transfusion; blood 

TYPES. 

CROUP, a disease scientifically 
known as acute obstructive laryngitis, 
diphtheria, or occasionally strepto¬ 
coccus sore throat. Croup really re¬ 
fers to a single symptom of throat 
infection since it is used to describe 
any condition characterized by a 
harsh brassy cough and difficult 
respiration with a spasm of the 
larynx and a wheezing sound. Often 
caused by viruses, croup may be a 
secondary infection in cases of low¬ 
ered resistance or other bacterial in¬ 
fections. Although it can affect adults, 
croup usually occurs in small chil¬ 
dren between one and six years of 
age. This age group is probably af¬ 
fected because it cannot easily cough 
up the bacteria-laden mucus which 
drips down the throat. The shorter 
ch ann el to the larynx also permits 
easier infection. 

In croup, the laiyngeal cords or the 
vocal cords are infiamed and swollen 
so that breathing has a wheezy sound. 
The child coughs constantly, endeav¬ 
oring to get rid of the obstruction. 
In spasmodic croup, spasm of the 
cords occurs which makes them red 


and puUs them toward each other 
without the presence of any obvious 
infection. A form of spasmodic croup 
in small children is laryngismus 
stridulus or “false croup.” The infant 
breathes laboriously and respiration 
may even stop; the face flushes and 
then turns blue. However, after a 
short time, relaxation of the spasm 
sets in. During a crying spell, breath¬ 
ing will become normal again. 

The most significant step in croup 
is to determine exactly what is wrong. 
The most serious form of the throat 
infection is that due to the diphtheria 
germ. In diphtheria, a thick adherent 
membrane forms in the throat. In 
severe forms of streptococcus of the 
throat, a membrane also forms, but 
usually is less thick and white. In the 
worst forms of croup, the fever is 
high, breathing excessively labored, 
and the child is exceedingly ill. In 
simpler cases of croup, the doctor 
usually advises that the child be put 
to bed promptly and given plenty of 
fluids. Steam inhalations, which may 
or may not be medicated with ben¬ 
zoin or other soothing oils, according 
to the doctor, usually provide notice¬ 
able relief. In cases of high fever, 
cool moist air may be preferred to 
hot steam. If coughing is severe, the 
doctor may prescribe sedatives which 
will relieve the spasms. An ice bag is 
sometimes used to relieve a sore 
throat. 

The seriously dangerous cases of 
croup are those in which there is 
complete obstruction to breathing, 
and imm ediate medical attention is 
urgent. In these cases, the doctor may 
have oxygen supplied to the child 

261 



CUiETTAGE 


cyis 


tbroiigli a small tube inserted into 
the opening remaining in the throat. 
A tube, known as an mtnbation tube, 
may be put into the throat which as¬ 
sures the passage of air through the 
larynx. In the most severe cases, a 
tracheotomy is performed; an open¬ 
ing is made directly into the wind¬ 
pipe from the outside which permits 
the patient to continue breathing 
while the inflammation is healing. 
Any case with severe swelling in the 
throat and difficulty in breathing 
should be regarded as serious, since 
stoppage of breathing for even a few 
minutes may be fatal. 

CUEETTAGE, the scraping of a 
body cavity with an instrument, such 
as a curette. 

CUSHING’S SYNDROME, a group 
of symptoms associated with Cush¬ 
ing’s disease, which was first de¬ 
scribed in 1932 by Dr. Harvey Wil¬ 
liams Cushing, famous American 
brain surgeon. 

The disease, which seems to affect 
women primarily, is due to a tumor 
in the pituitary gland. Among its 
symptoms are excessive obesity of 
the abdomen and buttocks, color 
changes of face and hands which 
make the skin look bruised and 
stretched, brittleness of bones, and 
suppression or lowering of sexual 
functions. Diabetes often is a com¬ 
plication. Women with Cushing’s 
disease develop excessive hair growth, 
such as mustaches and beards. 

CUTANEOUS SENSES, the four 

262 


senses associated with the skin: 
touch, heat, cold, and pain. The 
sense of pain is especiaHy well dis¬ 
tributed over the surface of the body. 
The senses of heat, cold, and touch 
are responsive to lighter stimulation 
than the sense of pain. Pain develops 
as a sensation from stronger stimula¬ 
tion, and if the stimulus producing 
a sensation of touch, heat, or cold 
is increased, the sensation becomes 
pain. 

CUTS, gashes in the skin made by a 
sharp-edged object such as a knife or 
broken glass. All cuts, even very 
small ones, must be carefully treated 
to avoid infection. They should be 
thoroughly cleansed with soap and 
water, and then covered with a clean 
piece of linen or sterile gauze. If the 
cut bleeds profusely, as it often does 
when blood vessels have been severed, 
pressure must be applied to control 
the flow of blood. Strong antiseptics 
should be avoided, but tincture of 
iodine, metaphen, and other mild an¬ 
tiseptics can be applied to destroy 
surface bacteria. 

If the wound is deep or dirty, a 
doctor should be consulted, or the 
person taken to the nearest hospital. 
Suturing or sewing together a deep 
cut will help the healing process and 
avoid unsightly scars. An injection of 
tetanus antitoxin ma}’ be necessary to 
prevent lockjaw. In deep cuts, a 
physician must frequently determine 
whether or not a tendon has been 
severed, as tendon repairs must be 
made as soon as possible after the 
accident. A physician should always 
be consulted in cases of deep cuts. 



CYANOSIS 


CYSTITIS 


CYANOSIS, a condition which, may 
occur during the course of certain 
disorders of the respiratory, nervous, 
brain, and circulatory systems. The 
face, lips, and skin may acquire a 
bluish tinge. Cyanosis is caused by 
defects in the oxidation of the blood 
and may also be a side effect of sul¬ 
fonamides and other drugs which in¬ 
fluence oxidation. 

CYCLOPROPANE, a saturated cy¬ 
clic hydrocarbon gas which has the 
odor of petroleum benzene. It is a 
potent but relatively nonirritating and 
nontoxic drug employed as an inhala¬ 
tion anesthetic—for example, to les¬ 
sen intense labor pains. Cyclopropane 
works rapidly and rarely leaves after¬ 
effects. 

CYST, literally a bladder containing 
fluid. In medicine it denotes a sac 
which contains fluids or other semi¬ 
solid morbid substances. Cysts de¬ 
velop in many parts of the body and 
are of all sizes and degrees of sever¬ 
ity. While their cause cannot always 
be determined, cysts are apt to form 
lumpy swellings beneath the mucous 
membranes or beneath the skin. A 
cyst is ordinarily movable, while a 
tumor, a new grovrth of cells and tis¬ 
sues, is flnnly rooted in the tissues. 

Some harmless or benign forms of 
cysts do not require medical atten¬ 
tion; others do. The most frequent 
location of cysts which demand sur¬ 
gery are in the skin and glands. 
Whenever the opening of the glandu¬ 
lar cell or organ is blocked, the ac¬ 
cumulation of fluid produces a cyst. 
Cysts are also qmte frequent in vari¬ 


ous parts of the female reproductive 
organs and in breasts with cracked 
nipples, which develop during nurs¬ 
ing. 

Among other substances, cysts 
may enclose foreign bodies (adven¬ 
titious cysts), gas (air cysts), jelly- 
like substances (colloid cysts), and 
others. 

CYSTIC FIBROSIS, a chronic chil¬ 
dren’s disease of the glands of ex¬ 
ternal secretion. It may seriously af¬ 
fect respiratory passages, pancreas 
and liver, and sweat glands. The dis¬ 
ease, believe to have hereditary ori¬ 
gins, is often fatal unless diagnosed 
early. Continuous medical supervi¬ 
sion is required to prevent respira¬ 
tory infections. 

CYSTITIS, inflammation of the blad¬ 
der, acute or chronic, caused by ba¬ 
cilli. Women, especially during preg¬ 
nancy, are more subject to cystitis 
than men. 

One of the common symptoms of 
cystitis is a frequent urge to urinate. 
In many cases pus is found in the 
urine, and painful spasms during uri¬ 
nation radiate into the upper parts of 
the body. A low fever may also be pres¬ 
ent, and in more severe cases a rapid 
pulse, chills, and urinary retention. 

Bed rest, hot sitz baths, consump¬ 
tion of large quantities of fluid, 
evacuation of bowels, and a soft diet 
without spices, condiments, alcohol, 
and other stimulants are the first 
steps in treatment. Under professional 
supervision, cystitis responds well to 
antibiotics and sulfa drugs. Among 
the new preparations used are fura- 
dantin and mandelamine. Irrigation 

263 



CYSTOSCOPE 


CYSTOSCOPE 


of the bladder and eliminatioii of 
acid in the urine are helpful, and 
severe pain has been relieved by 
prescribed suppositories. Should the 
symptoms of acute cystitis persist, the 
condition may become chronic. As 
the kidneys may be damaged, it is 
advisable to have an x-ray examina¬ 
tion to determine the extent of the 
infection 


CYSTOSCOPE^ an instrument used 
m diagnosis and treatment of lesions 
of the urinary bladder, ureter, and 
kidney. It is inserted into the open¬ 
ing of the male penis or the female 
urethra and permits the physician to 
look directly into the bladder. The 
outer sheath of a cystoscope incor¬ 
porates a lighting system and room 
for the passage of operative devices. 


264 





DANDRUFF* See seborrhea. 

DDT, short for dichlor-diphenyl- 
trichloro-ethane, a potent insecticide 
developed, during World War II. As 
it is especially effective as a delousing 
agent, after the war its use success¬ 
fully lessened the spread of typhus in 
war-ravaged areas. DDT has also 
been used widely in tropical coun¬ 
tries to control jungle yellow fever. It 
is most effective in and about the 
home against flies, mosquitoes, lice, 
and chiggers. The DDT may be 
sprayed (5 per cent DDT solution) 
or dusted (10 per cent DDT). This 
insecticide has the advantage of 
longer-lasting effectiveness than other 
chemicals. It can be purchased at 
most drug, hardware, or food stores. 
A mixture of benzyl benzoate, DDT, 
and sulphur used on the skin has been 
found effective by physicians in eradi¬ 
cating the mites that cause scabies. 

DEADLY NIGHTSHADE POI¬ 
SONING. Deadly nightshade or bel¬ 
ladonna is a plant whose roots and 


leaves are used medically in various 
forms. Atropine is a white crystalline 
alkaloid obtained from belladonna. 

Symptoms of deadly nightshade 
poisoning are dryness in the throat 
and mouth with difficulty in swal¬ 
lowing, dryness of the skin, dilation 
of the pupils of the eyes, and blurred 
vision. The skin may develop a red 
rash, resembling scarlet fever rash. 
The pulse is more rapid and the per¬ 
son may suffer from delirium and 
hallucinations. 

A doctor should be called immedi¬ 
ately, and the person induced to 
vomit. Afterward give him strong 
tea (the tannic acid acts as an anti¬ 
dote) or hot coffee as a stimulant. 

DEAF MUTISM. A person who can 
neither bear nor speak suffers from 
deaf mutism, or is “deaf and dumb/" 
The term applies particularly if the 
inability to speak is due to congenital 
or early deafness. In other words, al¬ 
though he may have normal speech 
organs, the victim cannot form 
sounds becaime he has never heard. 


265 



DEAFNESS 


DEAFNESS 


Little caa be done to cure such 
conditioos^ Surgical treatment of the 
ear and throat is of a little value 
However, the victims can be taught 
to understand a spoken language. 
Ordinarily the deaf mute can learn 
this skill by observing and imitating 
the lips of others. If the mastery of 
this technique, lip reading, should be 
too difficult, the manual alphabet can 
be learned with relative ease by any 
deaf mute of normal intelligence. The 
education of deaf mutes must begin 
in the home, with the help of the 
family. Schools and institutions are 
available which specialize in the 
training of the deaf mute, and a 
child may be sent to one nearest his 
home. Schools for deaf mutes admit 
ail age groups, some beginning the 
training of children as early as two 
to three years of age. In recent years, 
new techniques of teaching have been 
progressing with exceptionally fine 
results. 

DEAFNESS^ the complete or nearly 
complete loss of hearing due to a 
variety of conditions which may af¬ 
fect the functions of the ear. Deaf¬ 
ness is congenital or acquired. It may 
be caused by an infection in one or 
both ears; result from another infec¬ 
tion in the body such as meningitis, 
scarlet fever, measles, whooping 
cough, or pneumonia; or be due to 
damage to the eardrum from a blow 
or accident. It is sometimes caused by 
hysteria. If the ear is subjected to 
incessant loud noise over a long 
period of time, hearing may be im¬ 
paired, and a sudden violent explo¬ 
sion can cause instantaneous deaf¬ 
ness. 


Otosclerosis, one of the most seri¬ 
ous forms of deafness, is caused by 
bony growths in the inner ear which 
hinder the conduction of sound and 
thus impair the hearing. As the per¬ 
son grows older, these growths be¬ 
come increasingly worse. An ear op¬ 
eration called fenestration has been 
successfully performed by ear sur¬ 
geons in cases of otosclerosis. In this 
operation a window is drilled into the 
labyrinth of the inner ear, thus per¬ 
mitting proper conduction of sound 
waves and compensating for the loss 
of function of the small bones of the 
inner ear due to the growths. An¬ 
other operation mobilizes the small 
bones of the ear. 

One of the greatest problems m 
medical diagnosis is to determine the 
exact degree of deafness. Ear spe¬ 
cialists give the deaf person a number 
of highly technical scientific tests 
The audiometer is one of the devices 
used in testing defective hearing. 
When loss of hearing is due to infec¬ 
tion, steps must be taken immediately 
by the doctor to stop the progress of 
the infection. If pus or infectious 
material forms in the external ear, 
the pressure should be released 
promptly. The eardrum may have 
to be punctured before permanent 
damage occurs. Infections in the 
throat or back of the nasal passages 
which connect with the internal audi¬ 
tory system should be given attention 
to prevent them from spreading. Any 
loss of hearing, however slight and 
regardless of cause, should be 
promptly attended to by an ear 
specialist. 

The development of the hearing 
aid has been a boon to the deaf and 


266 



HEARING DEFECTS INCREASE WrH 



Deafness — Impaired hearing may result from severe emotional stress, damage to the 
hearing system by accidents, ear infections, and such diseases as mumps, scarlet fever, 
measles, and meningitis. Hearing defects increase as the person advances in age. 


hard of hearing. Effective hearing 
aids at reasonable cost to fit various 
types of deafness have been devel¬ 
oped. Generally the two types of 
hearing aids are (1) those which act 
by air conduction and (2) those 
which act by bone conduction. Tests 
must be made by specialists to deter¬ 
mine the type of hearing aid best 
suited to the individual. In the case 
of children, the hearing aid should be 
fitted as soon as possible and the 
child taught to use it correctly so 
that he can adjust to his condition 
early in life. 

Lip reading may also assist the 
deaf or partially deaf person to lead 
a normal active life, and schools 
are available where persons of all 
ages can leam to lip read. The person 
whose hearing is defective should 


not retreat within himself and retire 
from the life about him. With the 
help of ear specialists, hearing aids, 
and lip reading, plus patience and 
courage, he can overcome his con¬ 
dition and live a full life. See also 

OTOSCLEROSIS. 

DECAY, DENTAL. See dental 

CARIES. 

DEFECATION, the act of elimina¬ 
tion from the bowel. See also 
CONSTIPATION. 

DEFICIENCY DISEASES, abnor¬ 
mal conditions or diseases caused by 
the absence in the diet of certain 
necessary substances, such as vita¬ 
mins, proteins, amino acids, min¬ 
erals, usually supplied by food. Some 
of the deficiency diseases are rickets, 

267 


* 



DEHYDRATION 


% 

P‘ 









Deficiency Diseases — Severe defective 
formation of the teeth associated with 
rickets in the child with a mild case of vita¬ 
min D deficiency, only the enamel of the 
teeth may be involved, but if the deficiency 
IS of long duration there also may be im¬ 
perfect formation of the dentin 



Delideney Diseases - Angular cheilosis 
associated with B-complex deficiency. The 
lips appear dry and cracked Oral tissues 
are frequently the first tissues to manifest 
clinical evidence of nutritional deficiency. 



due to a lack of vitamin D; scurvy, 
due to a lack of vitamin C; pellagra, 
associated for the most part with a 
lack of nicotinic acid, one of the B 
complex vitamins; xerophthalmia and 
night blindness, coming from a de¬ 
ficiency of vitamin A; beriberi, caused 
by thiamine deficiency; and goiter, re¬ 
lated to a lack of iodine. 

With the increased knowledge of 
nutrition and of the relation between 
diet and health, great steps have 
been made toward eradicating de¬ 
ficiency diseases. With the exception 
of rickets and pellagra, the United 
States is relatively free of deficiency 
diseases. See also nutrition; vita¬ 
mins, 

BEGENERATIVE DISEASES* The 
deterioration or breakdown of im¬ 
portant organs of the body, such as 
the heart, liver, and kidneys, leads 
to disorders called degenerative dis¬ 
eases. A group of degenerative dis¬ 
eases of the nervous system, such as 
various forms of sclerosis, both he¬ 
reditary and nonhereditary, pro¬ 
duces serious paralysis in various 
parts of the body. 

DEHlYBEATION refers to the loss 
of water from the body. Sometimes it 
occurs from perspiration due to over¬ 
heating in warm weather or over¬ 
exertion. The remedy is an increase 
in the intake of fluids such as water, 
fruit juices, or milk. Abnormal de¬ 
hydration may result from fever, 

Defkieticy Diseases — Cheilosis and an¬ 
gular stomatifis due to a diet deficient in 
riboflavin. The corners of the mouth are 
fissured and the lips are dry and cracked. 



DELIilUM 


DELiilUM TREMENS 


diarrhea^ vomiting, or other dis¬ 
orders. Such conditions may be seri¬ 
ous and the intake of fluids should 
be supervised by a physician or nurse. 
Salt deficiency may accompany both 
normal and abnormal dehydration. 
This may be remedied by adding 
salt tablets to the diet or by the 
injection of saline solution in the 
case of severe illness. 

The dangers of dehydration lie in 
the development of acidosis and the 
accumulation of waste products in 
the body. If the acidosis is severe as 
in diabetes, injections of an alkalizing 
solution are often given. 

Much progress has been made re¬ 
cently in the development of tech¬ 
niques for correcting dehydration, 
and countless lives are saved by the 
prompt application of such measures. 

DELIRIUMj a severe mental disturb¬ 
ance in which the sufferer is confused 
and disturbed by delusions and hal¬ 
lucinations. Extreme restlessness and 
excitement generally accompany de¬ 
lirium. The chief cause of a delirious 
state may be high fever, but it may 
result from mental disease or dis¬ 
order as well as a variety of condi¬ 
tions stemming from structural dam¬ 
age of the brain. 

When delirium is produced by high 
fever, the application of ice packs 
and cold compresses and other meas¬ 
ures to lower the temperature and 
calm the patient are helpful. Low, 
muttering delirium may occur to¬ 
ward the end of a fever. See also 
fever; mental disorders. 

DELIRIUM TREMENS, an acute 


disorder of the mind and body which 
results from alcoholism. Visual and 
auditory hallucinations as well as the 
physical symptoms of delirium tre¬ 
mens may follow abstinence after 
prolonged addiction, or may occur 
at any point in a long debauch. 

Ordinarily an attack of delirium 
tremens lasts from two to ten days. 
The mind wanders and sensations of 
pain, itching, burning, and pricMing 
of the skin torment the victim. His 
hearing and vision are disturbed and 
he may imagine he sees animals and 
loathsome insects of magnified size. 
In short, he has “the horrors.” 
Muttering and muscular tremors are 
also characteristic of this state. 

The control of delirium tremens is 
difficult. The mental aspects are im¬ 
portant. The lack of food during a 
long drinking bout brings on de¬ 
ficiencies of such vital elements in 
the diet as thiamine and nicotinic acid 
which are important to replace in 
order to eliminate some of the nerv¬ 
ous and muscular manifestations. 
Therefore, concentrated feeding of 
vitamins is essential in the treatment. 
Rest, too, is essential and if drugs 
and sleep producers are used these 
should be administered under most 
careful medical supervision. 

Proper circulation of the blood 
must be maintained. Until recently 
the victims were often placed in 
strait jackets or otherwise forcibly 
restrained and the resulting blocking 
of proper circulation by tight straps 
frequently brought on collapse of the 
heart and even death. In present-day 
treatment rest, nourishment, and a 
more positive approach to the total 


269 



DELIVERY 


DENGUE 


problem of the alcoholic yield better 
results. 

DELIVERY. See pregnancy and 

PRENATAL CARE. 

DELOUSING AGENTS. See ddt; 

LICE. 

DELUSIONS, false beliefs mani¬ 
fested by victims of mental disturb¬ 
ances. A common type of delusion, 
occurring in melancholia, is one in 
which the person thinks that certain 
organs are missing. Frequently a 
delusion is the first sign of mental 
disorder, and calls for prompt pro¬ 
fessional attention rather than futile 
attempts at reasoning with the un¬ 
fortunate person. 

DEMENTIA refers to loss or de¬ 
terioration of mental faculties and 
is characterized by confusion, lack of 
contact with reality, and apathy. 

DEMENTIA PRAECOX, the old 
word, no longer used, for schizophre¬ 
nia. See SCHIZOPHRENIA. 

DEMULCENT, any gummy or oily 
substance which has a soothing efl^ect 
on any part of the human body, 
especially on mucous membranes. 
The white of an egg, if it acts as a 
mollifying agent to the stomach, is 
also a demulcent. Among the best- 
known demulcents are glycerin, aca¬ 
cia, flax seed, Irish and Iceland 
mosses, licorice, sassafras, slippery 
elm, and starch paste. 

DENGUE (deng' ghee), an acute 
endemic and epidemic virus infection 
with severe symptoms which, how¬ 
ever, rarely lasts longer than seven 
days, and from which recovery is 

270 


almost always complete. The infec¬ 
tion is transmitted by the same mos¬ 
quito, the Aedes aegypti, that spreads 
yellow fever. Hot weather and heavy 
rainfall provide ideal conditions for 
breeding both the mosquito and the 
virus, and epidemics of dengue are 
common in tropical areas. During 
World War II, outbreaks of dengue 
among soldiers stationed in the Pacific 
area were frequent. Epidemics have 
occurred in recent years in the south¬ 
eastern and gulf sections of the 
United States, in Australia, Egypt, 
Greece, and Indo-China. In some 
areas, epidemics take place at five- 
year intervals, and sometimes affect 
more than half the population. An 
attack of dengue ordinarily produces 
immunity for five years or more in 
most people. 

About four to ten days after a 
person has been bitten by an infected 
mosquito, the symptoms begin sud¬ 
denly, with severe headache, extreme 
exhaustion, and pain behind the eyes 
which is aggravated by any move¬ 
ment of the eyelids. Within a few 
hours, intense pain in the back and 
joints makes any movement difficult. 
Because of this characteristic pain, 
dengue is also called “breakbone 
fever.” Temperature rises rapidly, 
sometimes reaching 106 °, the pulse 
is slowed, and the blood pressure 
drops. Often a pale pink, spotty rash 
appears, the face is flushed, the eye¬ 
balls congested, and some glands en¬ 
larged. After three or four days, 
the fever suddenly drops, there is 
profuse sweating, and the other 
symptoms disappear. This period of 
apparent improvement lasts about 



DEOTAL CAilES 


DENTAL CAilES 


twenty-four hours, then temperature 
rises again and the symptoms return. 
A characteristic rash, resembling 
scarlet fever rash, appears over the 
knees, ankles, and elbows and some¬ 
times spreads to the trunk, palms, 
and soles. The rash and symptoms 
continue until the fever drops again, 
usuaEy within two days or on the 
sixth or seventh day of illness. Peel¬ 
ing of the skin frequently follows. 

Convalescence is generally slow. 
Slow pulse, low blood pressure, and 
general loss of strength may persist 
for weeks. Bed rest and good nursing 
care are helpful. Physicians recom¬ 
mend large quantities of fluids, an 
ice cap on the head to reduce head¬ 
ache, and, if necessary, drugs to re¬ 
lieve the body aches and pains. To 
control the mosquitoes which spread 
the disease, repellents, DDT sprays, 
and screening should be used, and 
breeding places of mosquitoes de¬ 
tected and destroyed. Persons who 
are exposed to bites by the mosquito 
should wear protective clothing at 
ail times and use repellents. Vaccines 
for immunization against dengue have 
been developed and may be effective 
in preventing the disease. See also 
AEDES AEGYPTI. 

DENTAL CARIES, another name 
for tooth decay, a process in which 
bacteria form on the surface of the 
teeth and act upon carbohydrates to 

Dental Caries The teeth should be 
checked at least twice a year for signs of 
tooth decay Growing children require fre¬ 
quent check-ups so dental caries may be 
prevented Malocclusion, poor mouth hy¬ 
giene, and consumption of foods high in 
starches and sugar may produce dental 
caries. 


produce acids which gradually break 
down the enamel and dentine. Focal 
infection and ultimate decay and de¬ 
struction of the teeth may result. To 
keep the teeth healthy, both pre¬ 
ventive and corrective measures are 
necessary. 

Prevention of tooth decay begins 
with proper diet. A balanced diet that 
includes meat, milk, eggs, fruit, and 
vegetables is essential for mouth 
health. Sweets, starches, and carbo¬ 
hydrates, such as candy, bread, and 
potatoes, which tend to cause acid 
formation should be limited. Regular 
brushing of the teeth and use of 
dental floss is important. The dentist 
can demonstrate the correct way to 
brush the teeth. Teeth cleaning is 
most effective when it follows eating. 
Experiments in adding fluorine to the 
water supply have resulted in a sig¬ 
nificant drop in tooth decay. Another 
advance has been the discovery of a 




DENTIFRICE 


DENTIFRICE 


relationship between dental caries 
and Vitamin C deficiency. 

Regular visits to the dentist for x- 
rays, checkup, cleaning, and treat¬ 
ment should be a routine part of 
dental care. Children should be taken 
early for their first visit to the dentist 
with semiannual appomtments there¬ 
after. The dentist uses fillings as the 
best means of stopping decay in a 
cavity and also of preventing new 
cavities from forming. Fillings may 
be made of amalgams, cast gold in¬ 
lays, or gold foil. By removing the 
decayed portion of the tooth and 
treating the tooth to receive the fill¬ 
ing, the decaying process is stopped. 
The patient should, of course, follow 
whatever treatment the dentist rec¬ 
ommends. See also dentifrice; 
fluoridation; teeth. 

DENTIFRICE, a powder, paste, or 
other substance used in cleaning the 
teeth. The effectiveness of a dentifrice 
in combatting tooth decay is one of 
the most debated subjects in modern 
dentistry and medicine. Many dentists 
believe that despite advertising claims 
a dentifrice does little more than help 
keep the teeth clean. 

Some toothpastes, for example, are 
supposed to kill germs in the mouth. 
However, the first breath taken after 
brushing the teeth will introduce new 
gemK which the previous brushing 
will not affect. Microorganisms exist 
throughout nature and a variety of 
them may be found in the mou& at 
all times. Other dentifrices claim to 
counteract mouth acidity by their 
alkaline content, although the value 
of mouth alkalinity is not even ^tab- 


lished. A variety of other claims exist, 
such as sterilization of the gums and 
digestion of food particles in the 
mouth. 

The significant fact regarding all 
these preparations is that they are 
only in the mouth for a very short 
time, and therefore any effect they 
may have, apart from the actual 
cleaning, is temporary. 

Normal teeth and gums do not 
need any special antiseptic. A rinse 
with plain water is as useful as any 
mouthwash. However, some people 
like the refreshing aftertaste of 
mouthwash. Most mouthwashes fol¬ 
low a fixed formula of the National 
Formulary, and are known as liquor 
antisepticus or liquor antisepticus 
alkalinus. Similar preparations are 
sold as Listerine and Glycothymaline. 

When a serious infection, such as 
trench mouth or Vincent’s angina, 
canker sores or blisters, exists in the 
mouth, the dentist applies substances, 
proven by use and experiment to be 
germicidal, to the infected areas. 
These include hydrogen peroxide or 
sodium perborate. 

Research is being done to develop 
a control effective against tooth de¬ 
cay. Products containing peniciliin 
or chlorophyll have been produced 
and sold, but the claims for them have 
not been scientifically established. 

Fluorine in the form of sodium 
fluoride added to supplies of drinking 
water has been tested and found ef¬ 
fective in reducing tooth decay, and 
increasing tests further corroborate 
this. Similarly sodium fluoride in a 
diluted solution can be directly ap¬ 
plied to the teeth by the dentist. 


272 



DENTINE 


DERMATITIS 


Although there is still no means of 
preventing tooth decay, certain pre¬ 
cautionary measures can be taken by 
everyone. Thorough brushing of the 
teeth morning and evening, and pref¬ 
erably also after heavy consumption 
of sugary things such as candy, is a 
deterrent to decay. A good balanced 
diet, containing adequate amounts 
of proteins, carbohydrates, minerals, 
and vitamins, particularly A, C, and 
D, and calcium is an important pro¬ 
tective measure for the health of the 
teeth as well as of the entire body. 
According to studies cited by the 
Journal of the American Dental As¬ 
sociation, reduction of sugar intake 
will decrease dental caries in about 
90 per cent of the people. Although 
some carbohydrate is essential in the 
diet, most people can benefit by a 
reduction of sugar-containing foods. 
See also fluoridation; Vincent’s 
ANGINA. 

DENTBVE, the major portion of a 
tooth, the chalky part, found under 
the enamel and under the cement of 
the root. Specifically it resembles 
bone, except that it is harder and 
denser and differs in structure. Den¬ 
tine contains numerous tiny tubelike 
passages which not only branch out¬ 
ward toward the surface of the tooth 
but also contain the same pulplike 
material which is found in the center 
of the tooth. 

When exposed to the air, dentine 
may sometimes be sensitive, and 
occasionally it is defective in its 
lime content. This deficiency, which 
is inherited, gives the teeth a mflky 


brown appearance. See also dental 
caries; teeth. 

DENTURE, an artificial restoration 
of several teeth. If all the teeth of one 
jaw are replaced, the structure is 
known as a full denture; and if fewer 
teeth are concerned, the substitute is 
called a partial denture. 

DEPILATORY, an agent to remove 
hair. The hair-removing agent may be 
a chemical paste, a wax, razor, ab¬ 
rasive, or electric current. When a 
chemical-paste depilatory is used, the 
paste is placed on the skin for a short 
time and the hair comes off when 
the paste is removed. Care should be 
taken to leave the paste on for only 
the necessary time since it might be 
injurious to the skin if left on longer. 
The skin should be washed as soon 
as the paste has been removed, and 
a cold cream may be applied to 
soothe the skin. In the wax method, 
liquid wax is applied to the skin and 
allowed to harden. The hair comes 
off when the layer of wax is removed 
from the skin. Here the primary 
precaution is that the wax be applied 
at the proper temperature to avoid 
burning the skin. Electrolysis attacks 
the hair root, and if done by a 
skilled operator when the hair is still 
fine and thin the hair may be per¬ 
manently destroyed, leaving no mark 
on the skin. See also cosmetics; 
hair; SKIIN. 

DEPRESSION. See involutional 
melancholia; manic-depressive 
psychosis; neurosis. 

DERMATITIS, the technical term 

273 



DERMOID CYST 


DIABETES 


for inflammation of the skin. See also 
acne; skin, 

DERMOID CYST, a saclike growth 
found, for example, in the ovary or 
in the chest, and containing such 
startling elements as hair, skin, and 
teeth. This type of cyst, probably 
prenatal in origin, grows slowly and 
does not spread through the body. As 
the person grows older, however, the 
dermoid cyst may irritate parts of the 
body. Therefore its removal, by sur¬ 
gery, is usually recommended. Der¬ 
moid cysts do not tend to recur. See 
also cancer; cyst; skin. 

DEVIL’S GRIP, also known as 
pleurodynia and Bomeholm disease, 
an infection caused by the coxahackie 
virus which produces intense spasms 
of pain in the chest wall. Sometimes 
devil’s grip occurs in epidemics 
throughout the United States, al¬ 
most invariably during warm weather. 
The virus is present in discharges 
from the nose and throat and the 
infection is spread by contact. Chil¬ 
dren and young people are most often 
affected. 

After an incubation period of from 
two to four days, sudden short but 
extremely sharp spasms of pain in 
the chest wall and lining of the chest, 
or pleura, appear. The pain may vary 
from day to day from a dull pressure 
to an excruciating seizure. Coughing, 
sneezing, and even deep breathing 
aggravate the pain. Fever is generally 
present. 

Although the pain is agonizing dur¬ 
ing the spasms, there are usually no 
serious complications. A chest binder 


or the application of heat is often 
helpful. 

DEXTROSE, one of the sugars pro¬ 
duced by the digestion of starches in 
the body. Made chemically, dextrose 
is widely used in medicine to supply 
energy to patients who cannot be fed 
by mouth. It is readily absorbed into 
the body and is usually fed intra¬ 
venously. Dextrose is also useful in 
prevention of circulatory failure. 

DIABETES, the ordinary designation 
for the condition in which the body 
cannot utilize sugar normally, causing 
unusually high sugar levels in blood 
and urine. Properly speaking, how¬ 
ever, the medical term is diabetes 
mellitus, and is entirely unrelated to 
a completely different disease, dia¬ 
betes insipidus. 

The essential factor in diabetes 
mellitus is insufficiency of insulin, 
which is secreted by specialized cells 
in the pancreas. This lack has a 
profound effect on the body. Sugar 
is produced by the intestinal diges¬ 
tion of carbohydrate foods. It is then 
transported in the blood to the liver 
where it is converted into glycogen 
which can be stored in the liver and 
muscles and be readily converted to 
sugar for fuel when the muscles need 
it. When insulin is lacking, the body 
is unable to transform sugar into 
glycogen. Then the sugar remains 
in the blood, is excreted in the urine, 
and is unavailable to the tissues and 
organs that require it. 

Diabetes insipidus is characterized 
by excessive overactivity of the 
kidneys and overexcretion of urine. 
Its source is uncertain, but it is be- 


274 



DlAiiTES 


DiABEIES 


lieved to be related to some disorder 
in the central nervous system that in¬ 
volves the area of the brain with 
which the pituitary gland is as¬ 
sociated. 

Until the early 1920’s, diabetes 
mellitas was an extremely serious 
disease. Ail diabetics died young and 
a diabetic child had a short life ex¬ 
pectancy. The discovery of insulin 
and its proper use in restoring order 
to the disrupted sugar metabolism 
of the diabetic has removed fear of 
this disease. Although diabetes re¬ 
quires constant attention and sMllful 
management, even diabetic children 



Diabetes — If o normal amount of sugar is 
ingested in the diet and if the body is able 
to handle the sugar and perform the chem¬ 
ical changes {metabolism} necessary to con¬ 
vert the sugar to energy, then normal sugar 
metabolism takes place as the above figure 
illustrates. However, should the liver not 
store sugar properly, or the pancreas not 
provide the substance flnsulin) important for 
utilizafion of sugar by the body, there would 
be ohnormal sugar levels In the blood and 
urine. 


grow up to live active lives, marry, 
and become parents. Dr. E. P. 
Joslin, an American physician who 
has treated diabetics for more than 
half a century and is one of the 
authorities in the field, says that in 
1900 his patients averaged a life span 
of approximately five years. Today 
they can exect to live out their nor¬ 
mal life expectancy. 

Diabetes today is less menaciiig 
than a major infection. The discovery 
and use of insulin have made the 
control of diabetes possible. But in¬ 
sulin does not cure the condition. It 
can only substitute for a critical de¬ 
ficiency. If this outside source is dis¬ 
continued, the body will be in as 
dangerous a condition as before. 

The basic concept of diabetes is 
that a disorder, such as an infection 
or a hereditary tendency, affects the 
pancreas or the insulin-producing 
parts of it. Excessive eating over a 
long time or emotional stress or 
mental shock can incite temporary 
attacks of diabetes. Studies now sug¬ 
gest that more may be involved than 
pancreatic disease alone. The pitui¬ 
tary and adrenal glands may be 
implicated and the whole diabetic 
process more complex than was 
formerly believed. 

Without treatment, the diabetic, 
although eating and drinking in an 
endeavor to satisfy a perpetual 
hunger and thirst because of the 
sugar circulating in his blood, loses 
weight, becomes weak, and is sus¬ 
ceptible to nervous complications. He 
is far more prone to infection than 
others, especially to tuberculosis, and 
is disposed to gangrene and skin 


275 




DIABETES 


DIABETES 


damage. The characteristic terminal 
stage of the disease, when untreated, 
is a typical coma. Poisoned by acido¬ 
sis, which results from disturbance of 
body chemistry, the diabetic person 
loses consciousness and dies without 
regaining it. Coma is also a threat to 
those treated. Therefore, careful reg¬ 
ulation of the condition with insulin 
must be properly observed. 

Diabetic coma results when the 
blood sugar level becomes high, and 
acid products of the incomplete 
breakdown of carbohydrates ac¬ 
cumulate in the blood. It may occur 
when insulin dosage is missed or is 
inadequate to balance food intake, or 
under other circumstances, upsetting 
the necessary balance between the 
sugar and the insulin in the system. 

Diabetic coma is apt to be preceded 
by nausea and vomiting and, before 
these, by gradually increasing fatigue, 
weakness, and irritability. The phy¬ 
sician should be consulted promptly 
on appearance of any of these symp¬ 
toms. The patient should go to bed as 
a precaution against coma until the 
physician arrives. 

Despite its slow onset, diabetic 
coma moves swiftly and may be 
critical. Once unconscious, the patient 
requires constant attendance by a 
doctor and, if possible, a nurse until 
he regains consciousness and during 
the following week or two of re¬ 
cuperation. 

Diabetic patients need never suffer 
coma, according to Dr. Joslin, if 
they adhere to the prescribed diet, 
keep a check on their output of sugar, 
and maintain the schedule of insulin 
injections scrupulously. They should 


also know that extra insulin is 
needed to offset the effects of in¬ 
fection, which increases the severity 
of the condition. 

During 1956, discoveries were 
announced of products which can be 
taken by mouth and which have an 
action like that of insulin in con¬ 
trolling metabolism of sugar. Ex¬ 
tensive tests made in many countries 
have established the limitations of 
these products. They should never be 
used unless prescribed by a phy¬ 
sician. In some cases, toxic side 
effects were observed. In the United 
States the two products now avail¬ 
able are Orinase and Diabenase. The 
drug works best in moderate cases of 
diabetes and in middle-aged persons. 

Untreated diabetes in young per¬ 
sons strikes with greater force and 
results in death more quickly than in 
older persons. In the latter, it may be 
quite mild and exist for years wdthout 
serious effect. Diabetes does not usu¬ 
ally appear in younger people. Two- 
thirds of all cases start after the 
person has passed the age of forty. 

Overweight is one of the most sig¬ 
nificant factors associated with the 
development of diabetes, and modem 
living, with more eating and less 
labor of the kind necessary to bum 
up what is consumed, makes that 
condition a constantly greater prob¬ 
lem. People become overweight, and 
diabetes is a price that many of 
them pay. 

Although a hereditary tendency for 
diabetes does occur, it is a recessive 
characteristic, which means that un¬ 
less reinforced by the addition of new 
diabetes-prone members, a family 


276 



Diabetes — The Pancreas (circled) is an organ found in the abdomen. If produces pancreatic 
juice {aids in the digestion of food) and the hormone, insulin (important in the use of sugar 
by the body). !f the cells of the pancreas which produce insulin are damaged, blood sugar 


levels are not controlled and diabetes results. 

will tend to breed it out The mar¬ 
riage likeliest to produce diabetic 
children k that in which both parents 
are not only diabetic but also come 
from demonstrably diabetic predeces¬ 
sors. All the children may well have 
the disorder. But the diabetic who 
marries a nondiabetic of nondiabetic 
stock has much less reason to fear 
that the children will be affected. 
In a marriage of two nondiabetics 


whose family records show a sub¬ 
stantial number of cases, one of four 
children may manifest the tendency, 
though not mevitably. 

Today control of the diet is an 
indispensable part of treatment. Un¬ 
less it is coordinated with administra¬ 
tion of insulin in the most rigorously 
careful manner, complications may 
occur. The phenomenon involved is 
not a single process and if one por- 

277 








Too much suaair. 
Overflow produces 
abnormal amount 
_of vrine. 


Diabetes — The mechanism of diabetes The insulin from the pancreas is necessary for the 
utilization of sugar by the body. Failure of the pancreas to produce insulin results in no body 

energy and large amoiints of urine containing sugar. 


278 


dC 























DIABETES 


DIABETES 


tion is disrupted the whole network 

IS. 

The normal quantity of sugar in 
the blood ranges from 80 to 120 mil¬ 
ligrams in each 100 cubic centi¬ 
meters. The diabetic has much more. 
Thus, one basic element of diet modi¬ 
fication is to reduce the intake of 
carbohydrates, sugars, and starches. 
This must be done with care, since 
fats are not properly metabolized in 
the total absence of carbohydrates, 
and acidosis may result. Acids re¬ 
sulting from incomplete breakdown 
of fats accumulate in the blood with 
the excess sugar, and coma may re¬ 
sult. 

Administration of insulin must be 
kept constantly in balance with the 
intake of food and the blood sugar 
levels in the body. The hormone is a 
potent substance which can cause 
shock and unconsciousness when an 
excess gets into the blood. This reac¬ 
tion is the basis of its use for shock 
therapy in mental illness, comparable 
to electric shock. 

Diet control for the diabetic should 
provide the nourishment indispensa¬ 
ble to health and growth, without 
overtaxing the body’s diminishing 
capacity to metabolize sugars. The 
patient should keep his weight a little 
lower than average for his height, sex, 
and age. Insulin given to excessively 
obese people with mild diabetes is 
not very effective. Nevertheless, 
enough food should be consumed to 
satisfy hunger adequately. The dia¬ 
betic diet should be calculated by a 
physician and dietician who estimate 
the patient’s need in calories on a 
basis of his weight, age, and occupa¬ 
tion. The patient’s capacity for dis¬ 


posing of sugar must be determined, 
and the doctor must decide to what 
extent diet may be relied on to re¬ 
lieve the basic condition and how 
much it must be supplemented by in¬ 
sulin. 

In order to develop a diabetic’s 
diet, his tolerance for sugar is estab¬ 
lished by beginning with an ex¬ 
tremely simple intake and gradually 
incre^ing it until appearance of sugar 
in the urine begins to show that sugar 
capacity has been reached. At first, 
the patient will receive mostly vege¬ 
tables with less than 5 per cent car¬ 
bohydrates, such as cauliflower, cel¬ 
ery, canned string beans, spinach, 
asparagus, lettuce, Brussels sprouts, 
artichokes, tomatoes, radishes, rhu¬ 
barb, cabbage, and eggplant. The 
patient will receive from 150 to 200 
grams of these and the bulk will re¬ 
lieve his hunger pangs without pro¬ 
viding much nourishment. He should 
have a scale for weighing his meals. 
Meal plans and diet charts are availa¬ 
ble at minimum cost from the Ameri¬ 
can Dietetic Association, 620 North 
Michigan Avenue, Chicago 11, Illi¬ 
nois. 

In the absence of sugar in the ex¬ 
creted fluids, the diet is augmented on 
each successive day to include an¬ 
other five grams of carbohydrates, up 
to a total of twenty per day. Then the 
increase is slowed to the addition of 
five grams every other day. This is 
continued until either sugar appears 
in the urine or the patient is con¬ 
suming three grams of carbohydrates 
for every thousand grams of body 
weight within each twenty-four 
hours. 

Two or three days after the special 

279 



DIABETES 


diet has been started, vegetables con¬ 
taining 10 per cent carbohydrates 
may be included k the diet to pro¬ 
vide the added sugar mtake desired. 
Such vegetables kclude canned peas, 
onions, beets, turnips, carrots, and 
squash. Later, vegetables of 15 per 
cent sugar content may be given, such 
as parsnips or canned lima beans, 
or even some with 20 per cent sugar 
content, such as succotash, beans, 
potatoes, and com. Vegetables should 
be cooked k a double boiler, so that 
ail juices are retained. 

Bread is usually omitted from a 
diabetic diet because of the large 
proportion of starch it contaks. Spe¬ 
cial breads, however, made from 
gluten flour are available, and the 
label usually kdicates the amount of 
carbohydrates and protek present. 

The appearance of sugar k the pa¬ 
tient’s urine may demand fasting for 
a short time until the urine is clear 
agak, or ksulk may be needed. In¬ 
sulk makes it possible for diabetics 
to eat a greater range of foods and 
diminishes or elimkates the need for 

Diabetes—The proper technique for infect' 
ing insulin. (A) The chosen spot of the skin 
is rubbed with alcohol. A different spot is 
selected each time, but the inner surfaces of 
the limbs should be avoided fB} A fold of 
skin IS pinched up, and the syringe is held 
by the barrel, not by the plunger. Since 
some spots feel the prick more than others, 
the needle should be moved a bit until a 
better spot is found, (C) The needle Is sud- 
denly jabbed In the skin. The needle should 
land about midway between the tips of the 
thumb and finger, well beneath the skin but 
not into the solid muscle. The needle is 
directed straight ahead so as not to bend or 
break, (D) Then the plunger is pushed in. 
After pulling the needle out, the cotton sotu- 
rafed with alcohol is held over the spot for 
a few seconds and the area of the skin is 
rubbed. 





DIABETES 


DIABETES 


fasting. Health and life expectancy 
are increased as a result. 

Since diabetics are susceptible to 
certain health hazards, they must ob¬ 
serve specific hygienic precautions. 
Eight to ten hours’ sleep at night, as 
well as a daily rest after lunch, if 
possible, are advisable, along with 
plenty of fresh air and an adequate 
amount of simshine. Sunburn should 
be avoided. The diabetic’s skin is low 
in resistance and subject to serious in¬ 
fection if damaged. Diabetics should 
not let the skin become excessively 
dry. Strong soaps tend to dry the 
skin and increase the hazard of in¬ 
fection and should be avoided. Cold 
cream or lanolin cream are good 
lubricants. 

Proper care of the feet is essential 
because foot difficulties may have 
serious consequences. The diabetic 
should take care to have proper 
shoes, to consult a chiropodist about 
calluses and corns, and to secure 
medical attention for even a min or 
bruise or wound. Iodine or other 
harsh applications should not be used. 
Tight garters should not be worn be¬ 
cause they may create disturbances 
of circulation and may incite gan¬ 
grene. 

Exercise should be taken in mod¬ 
eration and be gauged to the age and 
condition of the person, the length 
of time he has been diabetic and his 
total intake of food and insulin. Ex¬ 
ercise should be balanced against 
caloric consumption. 

Excessively hot baths must be 
avoided because of danger of injury 
or destruction of the tissue from 
burning. 


Any consumption of alcoholic bev¬ 
erages should be accompanied by 
exact knowledge of the quantity of 
calories taken, since a single gram of 
alcohol contains seven calories. Soft 
drinks, like ginger ale and other popu¬ 
lar beverages, are too sugar-laden to 
be safe for the diabetic. 

Smoking is not harmful so long as 
moderation is observed. Excessive 
smoking involves definite risk, both 
of increasing the sugar content of the 
blood and of disturbing the blood 
circulation, particularly in the legs. 

Dr. A. M. Sindoni recommends the 
following group of simple rules for 
diabetics as a safeguard against the 
acidosis or coma which threatens 
them if the sugar levels rise imduly: 

1. Be careful. Never permit your¬ 
self a careless attitude toward the 
disease. 

2. Keep all your dietary rules and, 
especially, never overeat. 

3. Never miss a scheduled insulin 
injection. 

4. Protect yourself from infec¬ 
tions; even a minor one may have 
serious results. 

5. Inform those who shoiild know 
of your condition, your surgeon, den¬ 
tist, chiropodist, and barber, so that 
proper precautions can be taken. 

6. Test the sugar content of your 
urine at least twice a week, and, if 
you have failed to observe the regula¬ 
tions, more frequently. 

7. Keep the mine free of sugar as 
a good assurance against acidosis or 
coma. 

8. Whenever you feel ill, take it 
seriously. Go to bed, avoid chiH, caU 


281 



DIABETES INSIPIDUS 


DIAPHRAGM 


the doctor, and care for yourself tintil 
he comes. 

See also acetest; clinitest; dia¬ 
betes insipidus; insulin. 

DIABETES INSIPIDUS, a disorder 
of the urinary system in which large 
amounts of urine are excreted. The 
urine is itself normal and sugar is not 
present as in diabetes mellitus. The 
origin of diabetes insipidus is not yet 
definitely established. In a specific 
case damage to the pituitary gland, 
because of hemorrhage, infection, or 
a tumor, may be responsible. A dis¬ 
order of the pituitary is probably 
accountable. 

As much as four to ten quarts of 
urine may be excreted daily, as con¬ 
trasted with IV 2 to two quarts nor¬ 
mally. One report describes the case 
of a sixteen-year-old boy who ex¬ 
creted thirty-three quarts of urine 
every twenty-four hours, and the 
equivalent of his own body weight in 
forty hours. Intense and practically 
uninterrupted thirst is anotoer symp¬ 
tom, and sleep is disturbed frequently 
because of the urge to urmate. The 
abnormal excretions caused by the 
disease result in weakness and ema¬ 
ciation. If a tumor or serious abscess 
in the pituitary region is not present, 
the person may get along satisfac¬ 
torily; but if one of these conditions 
is found, fatality usually ensues. 
Death then is the result of the original 
disorder and not of the diabetes insip¬ 
idus caused by it. 

Both the thirst and excessive flow 
of liquid can be controlled for as long 
as six hours by injection of an ex¬ 
tract of the posterior part of the 


pituitary gland. This substance when 
inhaled as a dry powder has the same 
effect but is apparently ineffective 
when taken by mouth. In severe cases 
surgical removal of a tumor or of the 
pituitary gland has brought control 
of the serious symptoms. See also 

DIABETES. 

DIAPER RASH, a roughness and 
irritation of the skin in the area of 
the baby’s diaper. Ordinarily infec¬ 
tion is not involved and the rash is 
caused by the rubbing of the skin 
against a wet diaper. The irritation is 
aggravated if the diapers have been 
washed with a harsh soap, such as a 
soap with a high alkali content, and 
then carelessly rinsed. The rash is 
also intensified if a high degree of 
ammonia has been permitted to form 
in the diaper itself. This ammonia is 
produced when bacteria come in con¬ 
tact with urine which has soaked into 
the diaper. 

A zinc ointment may be applied to 
relieve diaper rash. To prevent a re¬ 
currence of the rash, the diapers 
should be carefully washed with a 
mild soap and thoroughly rinsed. 
After laundering, the diapers may be 
soaked in a boric acid solution and 
hung in the sun. The presence of the 
boric acid will help prevent the for¬ 
mation of ammonia. These measures, 
plus careful attention to see that the 
baby’s skin is kept dry and clean, 
ordinarily will bring good results. 
Protective lotions are available, such 
as silica preparations and Diaperine. 
See also intertkigo. 

DIAPHRAGM, a wide muscle which 


282 



DIARRHEA 


DIARRHEA 



Dicipliragm — This is a demonstration of 
the method by which the motion of the dia¬ 
phragm expands the lungs. The diaphragm 
is a large muscle between the chest and the 
abdominal cavities. It is attached to the 
breastbone in the front, to the spine in the 
back and to the lower six ribs at the side of 
the body. With each expiration the dia¬ 
phragm moves upward and the lung con¬ 
tracts. On deep inspiration (drawing air in), 
the diaphragm moves downward against 
the abdominal cavity, the chest cavity is 
enlarged and the lungs expand. 


separates the abdominal and chest 
cavities of the body, contracts and 
expands with breathing, and is sig¬ 
nificant both to the breathing process 
and to the circulatory system. 

A disturbance of the action of the 
diaphragm due to injury to the nerves 
may have serious effects. Inflamma¬ 
tion or infection of the diaphragm 
causes shortness of breath, soreness, 
and a sense of pressure in the lower 
chest region. Spasm of the diaphragm 
may be either hiccups, the more com¬ 
mon form known as clonic spasm, or 
a constant tension of the muscle 
called tonic spasm. The tonic spasm 
is the more severe form and results 


from such diseases as tetanus, rabies, 
or epilepsy. Tonic spasm of long du¬ 
ration may cause exhaustion and, ul¬ 
timately, death by asphyxiation. 
Sometimes vigorous rubbing around 
the chest walls, the back, and the 
region over the stomach will relieve 
the spasm. 

Hernia or rupture of the dia¬ 
phragm may be caused by an in¬ 
jury, by a deformity before birth, or 
by a part of the stomach passing up¬ 
ward through the opening of the dia¬ 
phragm at the esophagus. When a 
rupture occurs suddenly, symptoms 
of shock with severe pain in the 
lower part of the chest, hiccups, 
shortness of breath, and vomiting 
may be present. The most prominent 
symptoms of a hernia of long dura¬ 
tion are shortness of breath and blue 
coloring. This is due to the possible 
displacement of the heart and to in¬ 
terference with the movement of the 
lungs. A child bom with a large dia¬ 
phragmatic hernia may also have 
what has been called an “upside- 
down stomach.” Unless this condition 
is detected promptly and corrected 
surgically, the infant may not survive. 

Surgery of the diaphragm for con¬ 
trol of rupture is usually successful. 
Special methods of study have been 
developed which include the Intro¬ 
duction into the stomach and esopha¬ 
gus of specific substances which are 
opaque to x-rays. Thus the surgeon 
can determine the exact point at 
which the displaced organ has passed 
through the diaphragm before the 
actual operation. See also hiccups. 

DIARRHEA, excessively frequent 

283 



DIET 

and moist or liquid evacuations from 
the bowels of the residual wastes 
from digestion; a symptom and not a 
disease. It may result from a tre¬ 
mendous range of different disorders, 
from indigestion to an acute infection 
or a cancer. 

Diarrhea may be transitory and 
pass after a brief acute episode or it 
may be chronic. In simple acute diar¬ 
rhea the frequent evacuations gradu¬ 
ally change in character from soft to 
liquid. Intestinal pain and straining 
to evacuate still further are charac¬ 
teristic; and thirst, abdominal tender¬ 
ness, and sometimes fever may be 
present. Frequently some toxic sub¬ 
stance or food, such as green fruit, 
roughage, highly spiced foods, or 
alcoholic drinks, may be the cause. 
The diarrhea usually subsides after 
the elimination of the causative ma¬ 
terial, although the irritation accom¬ 
panying it may prolong the condi¬ 
tion. 

When diarrhea is chronic, medical 
attention is imperative and failure to 
treat such a condition can result in 
serious weakness. The person wiU 
lose weight, strength, and appetite, 
develop anemia and become prey to 
various infections. Chronic diarrhea 
has been classified under eight main 
headings and forty subheadings, 
which suggests the variety of disease 
conditions with which it is associated. 
Some of these are a stomach disorder 
characterized by lack of a normal 
amount of acid, ulcers, cancers, food 
deficiencies, Bright’s disease, infec¬ 
tions with different microorganisms 
and parasites, the taking of poisonous 
substances such as mercury or ar- 


DIET !i^ DIGESTIVE DISOKDEiS 

senic, or of cathartic drags or of ex¬ 
cessive alcohol, various internal 
bodily disorders, special sensitivity to 
a certain food, and nervous and emo¬ 
tional disturbance. Various major in¬ 
fections which involve diarrhea are 
amebiasis, typhoid fever, cholera, 
and bacillary dysentery. It can also 
occur with measles, pneumonia, 
smaUpox, and influenza. 

A thorough study of the person 
affected and of the evacuated ma¬ 
terial is essential to establish the spe¬ 
cific cause of the diarrhea. The phy¬ 
sician is interested not only in the 
patient’s physical condition but also 
his emotional and mental state, the 
length of time the diarrhea has ex¬ 
isted, the type and location of the 
pain, and the diet prior to the onset 
of the condition. The physician will 
try to establish the specific cause of 
the diarrhea and direct the treatment 
toward elimination of the cause 
rather than the symptom. 

DIET. See diet, reducing; diet, 
special; nutrition; vitamins. 

DIET IN DIGESTIVE DISOR¬ 
DERS. The primary purpose of diet 
for digestive disorders is to provide 
foods that do not cause chemical, 
mechanical, or thermal irritation to 
the digestive system. The foods se¬ 
lected for these diets should be easily 
digested, nourishing, and in a form 
(chopped, mashed, etc.) which re¬ 
quires the least amount of work for 
the digestive system. Foods and liq¬ 
uids should never be eaten too hot 
or too cold. A diet should be made 
of such foods as fresh milk and 


284 



DiiT m DIGESTIVE DISOiDEiS 

cream, cooked cereals, creamed 
soups or vegetable purees, cooked 
fruits and vegetables without skins 
and seeds, custards, junket, simple 
puddings, fresh soft-boiled eggs, 
toast made from stale bread, fresh 
butter, gelatin, plain ice cream, 
chopped beef patties, and jellies. 
Later, tender meats, broiled, stewed, 
or baked, and fresh fish may be 
served. 

These foods contain proper quan¬ 
tities of proteins, carbohydrates, fats, 
and mineral salts. When the food is 
properly prepared and appetizingly 
served, such a diet should make 
digestion and absorption much 
easier. 

When mashed or pureed, the food 
is more readily digested by the vari¬ 
ous digestive juices, the saliva in the 
mouth, the gastric juice in the 
stomach, and the bile, pancreatic, 
and intestinal juices in the intestine. 
Some people who have stomach or 
intestinal disurbances do not toler¬ 
ate milk in its natural state; they 
must take such substitute fluids as 
sour milk, buttermilk, yoghurt, acid¬ 
ophilus milk, or mullsoy. 

Protein foods are chiefly meats, 
eggs, cheese, and fish. Carbohydrate 
foods are bread, cereals, vegetables, 
fruits, and sugars. Fat foods are 
butter, cream, lard, gravies, and oils. 
In these three groups are also present 
mineral salts and vitamins. 

In arranging the diet for the treat¬ 
ment of digestive disorders, foods 
which will agree with the digestive 
system should be prescribed. The 
condition of the stomach, liver, gall- 


DIET m DlGiSTiVE DiSORDEiS 

bladder, pancreas, and intestine must 

be borne in mind. 

When the stomach lacks acid and 
the proper ferments, intake of meats 
and other coarse foods must be re¬ 
duced or stopped entirely, depending 
upon the degree of stomach weak¬ 
ness. Only liquid foods should be- 
eaten for a time by a person with 
stomach or intestinal hemorrhage. If 
a patient has nausea or is vomiting 
all he eats, he may have to be fed 
intravenously, hypodermically, or 
rectally. Since symptoms vary con¬ 
siderably in different persons, the 
diet must be regulated accordingly. 
Some people with ulcer require one 
type of dietary regimen; others with 
symptoms of bleeding or profound 
spastic pam require other types. 
Since he knows just which foods are 
forbidden in a particular instance, 
the doctor’s problem is to prescribe 
a diet consisting of the nonirritable 
rather than easily assimilable foods. 

The average man or woman re¬ 
quires a diet furnishing from 2500 
to 3000 calories a day and which 
should include all the vitamin factors 
essential to well-being. These vita¬ 
mins are A, B, C, D, G, K, and P 
(riboflavin, pyridoxine, ascorbic 
acid, and so on). When a patient 
cannot assimilate food by mouth, 
vitamins may be added to the intra¬ 
venous medication or given hypo¬ 
dermically. When bleeding is present 
and the blood examination reveals 
poor clotting, vitamin K in suitable 
doses is often administered. 

Vitamin A is found in milk, egg 
yolk, cream, butter, cheese, lettuce, 


285 



DIET, REDUCING 


DIET, REDUCING 


carrots, salmon, bananas, prunes, 
peaches, apncots, and cod liver oil. 
Vitamin B with its associated com¬ 
plex factors is found in wheat germ, 
cereals, eggs, beef, liver, oysters, 
bread (particularly whole-wheat 
bread), salmon, prunes, oranges, 
carrots, lettuce, spinach, yeast, and 
tomatoes. Vitamin C is found in 
fruits and vegetables, such as lem¬ 
ons, oranges, limes, tomatoes, ap¬ 
ples, bananas, apricots, peaches, 
leafy vegetables, carrots, parsnips, 
peas, beets, asparagus, and in liver. 
Vitamin D is found in butter, cream, 
egg yolk, salmon, tuna fish and cod 
liver oil. 

DIET, REDUCING, a regimen of 
food and drink for the purpose of 
losing weight. In most cases of over¬ 
weight or obesity, a reducing diet is 
the most desirable treatment. In addi¬ 
tion to a wish to lose weight, the 
person should have a knowledge of 
the nutritional and caloric value of 
foods. The diet should include suffi¬ 
cient protein to prevent loss of body 
tissue protein. Carbohydrates should 
be limited and fat largely eliminated. 
To insure sufficient vitamin and min¬ 
eral intake, supplementary midtiple 
vitamin capsules should be taken 
daily. Losing weight involves a cut¬ 
ting down of regular everyday foo^ 
and does not necessitate specialized 
foods. Vegetables are to be cooked 
and eaten plain, without butter or 
sauces, and salads served without 
fatty dressings. Fruit should be fresh, 
or, if canned, without added sugar. 
Plentiful servings of low-calorie fruits 
and vegetables provide bulk and sat¬ 


isfy hunger. Only lean meats should 
be eaten. It is important to estab¬ 
lish regular hours for eating meals. 
A simple bedtime snack, such as an 
apple or glass of skim milk, will help 
prevent hunger in the early morning 
or the urge to eat during the night. 

For an extremely obese person 
who is not active, a daily diet of 
800 calories is possible. For moderate 
weight reduction, 1000 to 1200 calo¬ 
ries can be taken daily provided the 
person is fairly sedentary, and 1400 
to 1500 calories for persons requiring 
more energy for their daily activities. 

To maintain health while reducing, 
certain foods are essential. The daily 
diet should include: 1 egg, 2 glasses 
of skim milk or buttermilk, 3 slices of 
bread, preferably whole wheat, 2 
servings of lean meat, fish, fowl, or 
cottage cheese, 4 servings of raw or 
cooked vegetables, and 3 servings of 
fresh or imsweetened canned fruit. 
For the 800-calorie diet, the bread 
is omitted; for the 1200-calorie diet, 
an extra slice of bread and 3 tea¬ 
spoons of butter are added, and the 
1500-calorie diet can include 5 slices 
of bread, or 3 slices of bread and 2 
small potatoes, and 3 teaspoons of 
butter. The bread in the diet can be 
the high-protein, low-calorie bread 
now sold commercially. 

Following is a suggested day’s 
menu for the 1000-calorie diet. 

Breakfast 

Vi grapefruit 
1 slice toast 
1 egg 

1 glass skim milk 


286 



DIET, SPECIAL 


DIGESTION 


Coffee or tea, without cream, milk, or 
sugar, may be taken any time. 
Lunch 

1 slice bread 
1 cooked vegetable 
3 oz. lean meat 
vegetable salad 
1 serving fruit 

Dinner 

Same as lunch; add 1 glass skim milk. 

Bedtime snack: an apple or glass of 
skim milk. 

Following are lists of fruits and vege¬ 
tables which may be selected. 


Fruits 


Apples 

Peaches 

Berries 

Pears 

Cantaloupe 

Pineapple 

Grapefruit 

Plums 

Grapes 

Oranges 

Watermelon 

Vegetables 

Asparagus 

Mushrooms 

Broccoli 

Okra 

Brussels sprouts 

Peppers 

Cabbage 

Radishes 

Cauliflower 

Sauerkraut 

Celery 

Spinach 

Cucumber 

Squash 

Eggplant 

String beans 

Greens 

Tomatoes 

Lettuce 

Watercress 


After the weight has been reduced 
to the desired level, it is essential to 
continue to watch carefxiUy the diet 
and eating habits. The aim must be 
to maintain the new weight, and 
avoid the tendency to regain the 
pounds lost. See oho obesity. 


DIET, SPECIAL. In a number of 
specific diseases and bodily condi¬ 
tions, a special diet may be necessary 
—for example, in diabetes, heart 
disease, and in kidney, ulcer, and 
other infections. Such diets should 
be undertaken under the supervision 
of a physician. Conditions such as 
underweight and obesity, for safety 
and best results, should be properly 
supervised. 

Some special diets may be self-ad¬ 
ministered. Among these are: 

High-Caloric Diet: Add extra milk, 
cream, eggs, cheese, and custard to 
the regular diet. 

High-Protein Diet: Add extra meat, 
eggs, cheese, and custard. 

Low-Protein Diet: Omit meat and 
all but one egg daily; add portions of 
vegetables and fruits. 

High-Carbohydrate Diet: Omit 
meat and eggs, but add extra portions 
of vegetables and fruits, rice, pastas, 
and puddings. 

High-Fat Diet: Add extra butter, 
fats, fatty meats, oils, and cream to 
the regular diet. 

Salt-Free Diet: Use only salt-free 
bread and sweet butter. Salt must not 
be added to food in cooking or at 
any other time. 

See also diet, reducing; obesity. 

DIGESTION, the complex chemical 
and physiological process by which 
food is converted into soluble form 
for absorption into the tissues and 
cells of the body. 

In digestion, the food is first 
groimd and chewed in the mouth, 
which prepares it for action by the 
saliva. Saliva contains an enzyme 


287 



; Cr@ss se€fl®ii of y®yr wfiole Jigeitife pfiiit 



MOUTH 

Chops up and 
softens food 


SALifA GLANDS 

Make digestive 
juice 


DIGESTlfE TIME TABLE 


12:§i 

NOON 


ESOPHAGUS 

Passes food 
to stomach 


meaf starts 


STOMACH 
Breaks down 
food by muscular 
and chemical 
action 


first food 
enters stomach 


LIVER PANCREAS 

i Make digestive V 
juice for use in ^ 
.small intestine 


food starts 
to enter 
small intestine 


GALL BLADDER 

Stores digestive 
juice made by 
liver 


SMALL 

INTESTINE 

Breaks down 
food and 
[ absorbs it 
I into the 
I blood stream 


large intestine ' f, / 

■ { * ‘ '{ V ^ 

, • . .... 

V’ \ ^ ^ / 

oil . 1! ^ ■- 

food ready to' 
leave forge ', 
intestine . ■ , 




LARGE INTESTINE 
Absorbs water 
and remaining 
food. Stores waste 


RECTUM 

Eliminates 

wastes 


Graphics Institute 





DIGESTIVE SYSTEM 


DiGESTiVE SYSTEM 


which acts oa starch to convert it 
into sugar. Then the food passes 
through the esophagus into the stom¬ 
ach, where it is further disintegrated 
and acted upon by the stomach 
juices, which contain hydrochloric 
acid, pepsin, and other substances 
such as rennin which coagulates 
milk. Protein is broken down by 
the action of pepsin and hydro¬ 
chloric acid. The stomach usually re¬ 
quires about four hours of both 
mechanical and chemical action on 
food to complete its function. From 
the stomach the partly digested food 
passes into the small intestine, where 
both the mechanical and the chemical 
actions continue. 

In the small intestine, bile secreted 
by the liver and pancreatic juice from 
the pancreas act on protein, starch, 
sugar, and fats. Intestinal juices from 
the lining of the intestines also act 
on sugars and proteins to complete 
the major part of the chemical proc¬ 
ess of digestion. AU undigested food 
and debris pass, by muscular action, 
into the large intestine. Here water 
and glucose are absorbed, and fi¬ 
nally the remainder passes into the 
rectum whence it is eliminated as 
feces. 

The process by which the tissues 
utilize the food substances distributed 
to them by the Hood is the secondary 
phase of' digestion. In this process 
the living cells of every tissue and 
organ of the body absorb various 
food substances that they require and 
synthesize them into thek own struc¬ 
ture, 

DIGESIWE SYSTEM. All the parts 



Digestive System — The digestive organs 
in the abdomen. Notice that the stomach is 
located high in the left side of the abdomen. 
The liver is the large, dark organ found to 
the right of the stomach and the upper part 
of the small intestine. The pancreas Is de¬ 
picted here as being below the stomach. 
The small bulb on the bottom of the liver is 
the gall bladder. Tubes from these three 
organs {liver, pancreas and gall bladder) 
lead into the small intestine. The small 
intestine takes up most of the space in the 
abdomen and opens info the large intestine. 
The large intestine frames the small intes¬ 
tine by ascending on the right side, crossing 
over and then descending on the left side 
to end as the rectum, 

of the body coucemed with intake, 
digestion, and elimination constitute 


289 



DIGITALIS 


DIPHTHERIA 


the digestive system. The digestive 
tract is really a continuous tube 
whose parts are the mouth, pharynx, 
esophagus, stomach, duodenum, small 
intestine, large intestine, and anus or 
rectum. The linings of this intricate, 
convoluted tube perform chemical 
and mechanical actions on the food 
and absorb and transmit the resulting 
substances to the blood and lymph. 

The principal glands and organs 
that open into the digestive system 
are the salivary glands of the mouth 
and the liver and pancreas which 
open into the small intestine. Mucous 
glands perform a lubricating fimction 
throughout the tract, which enables 
food and waste material to pass 
through. 

Numerous disorders and diseases, 
both temporary and chronic, affect 
the digestive system. 

DIGITALIS, a valuable drug derived 
from the dried leaves of the purple 
foxglove. It is a powerful stimulant 
for the heart, and may also be used 
to provoke the flow of urine in per¬ 
sons afflicted with dropsy or edema. 

Digitalis can be dangerous and 
should never be used except in the 
dosage prescribed by the doctor. 
Even a slight excess over an ex¬ 
tended period of time may cause the 
drug to accumulate in the system and 
act as a poison. The first symptom of 
poisoning may be palpitation of the 
heart, since digitalis slows the heart¬ 
beat. Often the lips tinge and at the 
same time the person may find it 
difficult to breathe. Whenever such 
an attack occurs, the person should 
be put to bed at once and a doctor 


called; sometimes the patient may re¬ 
ceive a stimulant such as coffee. If 
his condition seems critical and the 
doctor is delayed, he may be given 
sips of tepid water to encourage vom¬ 
iting. See also heart. 

DILANTIN, the trade name for 
diphenylhydantoin sodium. It is a 
white powder used as an anticonvul¬ 
sant in the treatment of epilepsy, and 
is best taken with water at mealtimes, 
since it may be irritating if taken on 
an empty stomach. It should be taken 
only on the advice of a physician. 

DIPHTHERIA, an infectious disease 
that may occur in nose or throat 
and is characterized by fever, sore 
throat, heart weakness and anemia. 
Until recently one of the most 
feared of child diseases, diphtheria 
is now comparatively infrequent and 
the death rate from the illness is 
almost at the vanishing point. Diph¬ 
theria can be diagnosed with com¬ 
plete accuracy. In illness where 
diphtheria is suspected, a bacte¬ 
riologist can determine from a cul¬ 
ture of the infected area not only 
whether the disease-producing agents 
are the germs of diphtheria but also 
whether they represent any special 
type of that germ. 

It has been found that diphtheria 
germs vary in their virulence in dif¬ 
ferent epidemics. People may carry 
the germs of diphtheria in their 
throats without themselves being ill. 
There are germs which resemble the 
germ of diphtheria and which are 
nonvirulent. The diphtheria germ 
gets its effects in the body by pro- 


290 



DISC 


Disc 


ducing a poison known as the toxin 
of diphtheria. When this poison or 
toxin is injected into animals, it 
kills them, provided the dose of 
the poison is sufficient. The viru¬ 
lence of the germ can be measured 
by the amount of poison necessary 
to destroy an animal of standard 
weight. 

In the United States more than 
two thirds of all the cases of diph¬ 
theria occur in children below five 
years of age and over 80 per cent 
in children below ten years of age. 
Now that great numbers of children 
are inoculated against diphtheria by 
the use of diphtheria toxoid, there 
is a tendency for the disease to 
occur more frequently in older 
rather than in younger children. 

Diphtheria is spread by direct 
contact of a child who does not 
have the disease with one who does 
have it or with a carrier. Possibly 
there are indirect contacts. Before 
pasteurization of milk was adopted, 
infected milk sometimes spread 
diphtheria, but nowadays that source 
is no longer a menace. 

Usually from two to five days 
after he has been exposed to the 
germs, a child who is infected will 
de^’^elop a slight fever, going up to 
102 degrees Fahrenheit, a sore 
throat, general illness, and weakness 
such as is frequent with the begin¬ 
ning of almost any infectious dis¬ 
ease. The congestion and the growth 
of a membrane begin usually in the 
upper part of the throat or pharynx 
and then spread downward into the 
larynx, or voice box, and perhaps 


also to the nose. The membrane is 
a thin, grayish film which then 
thickens. Associated with the swell¬ 
ing and redness there ma> be en¬ 
largement of the glands m the neck 
and increasing fever. The more the 
throat is involved, the greater the 
spread of the membrane in wffiich 
the germs are found. 

An early diagnosis is of the ut¬ 
most importance in diphtheria. If 
the diagnosis is not made promptly 
and antitoxin in sufficient amount 
not given quickly, the swelling in the 
throat becomes larger, hemorrhages 
begin, the voice becomes high- 
pitched and strangled, and there is 
a fetid odor from the throat. If the 
continuous absorption of the poisons 
goes on, drowsiness is followed by 
delirium, and the danger of death 
is great. When the membrane in the 
larynx grows in size, breathing be¬ 
comes difficult and suffocation may 
ensue. 

Before the discovery of antitoxin, 
35 per cent of children with diph¬ 
theria died of the disease. In cases 
where the larynx, or voice box, was 
involved, 90 per cent died. Today 
the death rate has been reduced to 
nearly the disappearing point, due 
to the use of the antitoxin and the 
Schick test. The Schick test is im¬ 
portant in determining susceptibility 
to the disease. 

DISC, a plate of cartilage between 
the bones of the spine. When one of 
these discs is broken, the soft ma¬ 
terial which it contains may protrude 
in such a manner as to place pressure 


291 



DISINFECTION 


DISINFECTION 


on the spinal nerves. The person so 
affected feels as if something has 
given way in his back, and will com¬ 
plain of a pain which seems to radiate 
downward along the side on which 
the break has occurred. This pain, 
constant and severe, will be intensi¬ 
fied when he coughs, bends, or stands 
erect for a long time. Further symp¬ 
toms may include muscle spasms, a 
disposition to protect certain nerve 
areas, a diminished skin sensitivity 
in the affected area, and a decrease 
in tendon reflexes. Sometimes the 
break is visible under x-rays. 

If the injured person is permitted 
to walk, he will be required to wear 
a girdle or cast. Ordinarily, however, 
he will be put in a special type of 
bed, in which reinforcing boards have 
been placed tmder the mattress. Re¬ 
moval of the ruptured disc may be 
necessary and usually ends the diffi¬ 
culty. See also slipped disc; spinal 

CORD. 

DISINFECTION, the destruction or 
removal of germs or articles which 
may be germ-bearing from a sick¬ 
room following recovery from an in¬ 
fectious disease. During the course 
of an iUness, disinfection should be 
carried on constantly to prevent 
transmission of the disease. Dis¬ 
charged matter from the eyes, ears, 
nose, throat, skin, or other parts of 
the body should be destroyed by 
burning or other sure method, after 
being collected in containers which 
can also be destroyed. Towels, bed¬ 
clothes, and linens should be handled 
so that the infected side is turned in¬ 
ward, and those caring for these 

292 


items should be careful to hold them 
by the noninfected portions. 

The infectious material varies with 
different diseases. In chickenpox, the 
source of the infected discharges may 
be the mouth, nose, throat, or lesions 
of the skin; while in measles, menin¬ 
gitis, pneumonia, septic sore throat, 
and whooping cough it is usually 
from the mouth, nose, and throat. In 
typhoid, dysentery, and poliomyelitis, 
bowel discharge probably carries the 
infectious organisms. However, m 
poliomyelitis the mouth, nose, and 
throat may also be the source. In 
scarlet fever and diphtheria, infec¬ 
tious matter comes from the eyes, 
mouth, nose, throat, and wounded 
skin surfaces. 

After the patient has recovered, the 
sickroom and everything in it should 
be thoroughly disinfected. During the 
illness, upholstered furniture, carpet, 
curtains, and aU extraneous orna¬ 
ments should have been removed. At 
the end of the illness, beds, chairs, 
tables, floors, and woodwork must be 
completely scrubbed with soap and 
hot water, and linens and other wash¬ 
able fabrics boiled for at least fifteen 
minutes. Nonwashable materials can 
be exposed to direct sunlight out-of- 
doors for at least twenty-four hours; 
and rubber goods, such as sheets, hot- 
water bottles, and ice caps, can be 
washed with soap and water and 
placed out-of-doors to air and dry 
for at least two hours. Books, maga¬ 
zines, and toys which the patient has 
used should be burned. 

Good disinfectants are chloride of 
lime, creosol, or milk of lime in 
solution. Heat is one of the best germ 



DISLOCATION 


DIVERTICULITIS 


destroyers. Disinfection of the sick¬ 
room with sulphur vapor is a time- 
honored and effective method. 

DISLOCATION, the displacement of 
a part of the body from its usual 
place. The term is used ordinarily in 
connection with a bone, such as the 
elbow, shoulder, or knee, moved par¬ 
tially OF completely out of its normal 
position. Dislocations usually happen 
suddenly as the result of a blow, fall, 
or other accident, and recurrent dis¬ 
locations are not tmcommon, espe¬ 
cially with athletes. Because of the 
danger of further injury, when any 
type of dislocation occurs, only a 
physician should reset the displaced 
joint. Until the doctor arrives, the 
person should be made as comforta¬ 
ble as possible and kept warm. Cold 
compresses applied at the point of in¬ 
jury may relieve pain and prevent 
swelling. See also joints and joint 

DISORDERS. 

DIURESIS. To release an accumula¬ 
tion of fluids in the blood, a physician 
may prescribe drugs known as 
diuretics. The excessive excretion of 
urine is diuresis. Urine contains both 
solids and water. Some diuretics in¬ 
crease the discharge of water and 
others increase the amount of solids 
released. Specific diuretics release 
various types of solids. Several drugs 
may be prescribed when a single drug 
to achieve the desired effect is not 
known. Water is a good diuretic, un¬ 
less, of course, the body must get rid 
of an excessive amount of water. 
Diuretics which encourage the dis¬ 
charge of water are usually those 
which also stimulate circulation, such 


as digitalis, Diamox, alcohol, and 
coffee. Another group which includes 
mercury combinations may be classed 
as the mineral salt diuretics. For this 
purpose, mineral salt is effective only 
in small amounts, since larger doses 
may act instead as a stimulant to the 
bowels. See also kidneys; urine. 

DIVERTICULmS. Pouches, or di¬ 
verticula, which sometimes develop 
on the walls of the large intestines of 
adults, create diverticulosis. Inflam¬ 
mation or infection of these pouches 
is diverticulitis. 

The severity of diverticulitis can 
be determined by a test, known as the 
barium test, in which the patient 
swallows a barium mixture and is 
then examined by a series of x-rays 
of the colon. Thus, the pouches and 
the bowel contractions can be seen 
clearly, and the x-ray film will also 
show whether or not a narrowing or 
obstruction of the bowel is present. 

In acute diverticulitis, ulceration 
with consequent perforation of the 
wall of the bowel may result and 
cause massive hemorrhage which will 
require prompt surgery. 

In older people, one of the dangers 
of diverticulitis is chronic irritation 
with a possibility of cancer. Treat¬ 
ment of inflamed diverticuli includes 
rest and enemas to help cleanse the 
bowels when necessary. Sometimes 
mineral oU may be used to aid the 
passage of hardened material. Per¬ 
sistent obstruction or constant in¬ 
flammation and pain may also neces¬ 
sitate surgical treatment. 

Persons with diverticulitis require a 
soft diet, similar to that for those with 
ulcer. Irritating spices and sharp 

293 



DIVERTICULUM 


DOG BITES 


foods must be avoided, as well as 
fibrous foods and those containing 
seeds or skins. 

DIVERTICULUM, a small pouch 
which sometimes develops on the 
smooth wall of the intestinal tract. 

Meckel’s diverticulum, named for 
its discoverer, is a congenital deform¬ 
ity or abnormality occurring near the 
middle of the small intestine. This 
pouch may collect partially digested 
food and become inflam ed or infected 
and cause symptoms similar to those 
of appendicitis; also hemorrhage re¬ 
quiring surgical attention may result. 

Diverticula may also form in the 
esophagus, stomach, duodenum, or 
jejunum, and a single diverticulum 
may occur in the cecum or else¬ 
where in the colon. Many diverticula 
do not cause symptoms and will not 
require treatment, but when they be¬ 
come inflamed surgery is recom¬ 
mended to correct the condition. See 
also DIVERTICULITIS. 

DIZZINESS, sensation of swimming 
in the head; one of the commonest 
symptoms about which people com¬ 
plain. Like a cough, it may be a sign 
of something seriously wrong that de¬ 
mands prompt attention. 

Dizziness follows recovery from all 
kinds of illnesses. It may result from 
poisoning by drugs, or sensitivity to 
certain foods. It is a symptom in high 
blood pressure, in menopause, mi¬ 
graine headaches, eyestrain, brain 
injury, punctured eardrum, malfor¬ 
mation of the inner ear, syphilis, al¬ 
coholism, and many other diseases 
or disorders. 


A common form of dizziness re¬ 
sults from inflammation in that por¬ 
tion of the inner ear known as the 
semicircular canals. Anything that 
interferes with the delicate mecha¬ 
nism of these canals will produce at¬ 
tacks of dizziness. 

If dizziness is temporary and the 
condition responds to treatment such 
as suitable attention to diet, correc¬ 
tion of eyestrain, or regulation of 
kidney action, there is no cause for 
alarm. However, repeated and per¬ 
sistent dizziness calls for most careful 
diagnosis. There may be msufficient 
blood supply to the brain or weak¬ 
ened heart action. Dizziness in such 
cases is a distinct danger signal whose 
warning must be promptly heeded. 

Dizziness caused by seasickness or 
airsickness, as well as by other forms 
of motion, is helped by the use of 
drugs like Dramamine, Bonamine, or 
Marezine. See also motion sickness; 

VERTIGO. 

DOG BITES. Because of the possi¬ 
bility of hydrophobia, anyone bitten 
by a dog should receive the prompt 
attention of a physician. The wound 
may be carefully washed with soap 
and water, a weak solution of iodine 
applied, and the woimd covered with 
a clean bandage. If possible, the dog 
should be confined and watched until 
it is determined whether or not it has 
rabies. The necessary information 
should be given at once to the city 
authorities. If the dog has rabies the 
person bitten is given the Pasteur 
inoculations against rabies. The dog 
is killed and its brain examined for 


294 



DOUBLE VISION 


DREAMS 


the presence of Negri bodies which 
are diagnostic of rabies. See also 

RABIES. 

DOUBLE VISION. See eye, Diplo¬ 
pia. 

DOUCHE, a jet or current of water 
applied for cleansing purposes to any 
part, organ, or cavity of the body. 

The danger of germs is always 
greater when washing an internal 
portion of the body. Water used for 
this purpose should, therefore, be 
boiled, then the temperature brought 
as close as possible to that of the 
blood, about 100° F. Cold water 
must not be used since it is harmful 
when applied internally. 

Certain special equipment is neces¬ 
sary for the administration of a vagi¬ 
nal douche. First is the water con¬ 
tainer which may be made of tin, 
glass, rubber, or plastic. A length of 
rubber or plastic hosing is attached to 
the container with a vaginal tube of 
vulcanite or glass at the other end. 
Glass is more convenient for steriliz¬ 
ing purposes. This equipment must 
be kept absolutely clean at all times. 

The container should be placed 
two or three feet above the point 
where the fluid is to emerge, in order 
that the force of the flow of water be 
satisfactory. If the container is placed 
too high, the force might be danger¬ 
ous, and the liquid could reach un¬ 
intended areas. 

Before the tube is inserted, the 
fluid should be permitted to run 
through the entire hose so that all of 
the air is expelled. Petroleum jelly, if 
desired, may be smeared on the end 
of the tube, which should be thrust 


inward for a distance not exceeding 
three inches. Afterward the fluid may 
be ejected into any suitable recep¬ 
tacle. The vaginal douche is useful as 
an antiseptic, as a means of removing 
discharge, and also for controlling 
disagreeable odors. The solution em¬ 
ployed will be chosen accordingly. 
See also enema; nose; vagina. 

DRAMAMINE, the trade name for 
dimenhydrmate, a compound with 
antihistaminic properties which has 
been found to be effective in the pre¬ 
vention and treatment of motion sick¬ 
ness. This drug was developed during 
World War 11 when it was success¬ 
fully used in the control of seasick¬ 
ness among large numbers of troops. 

DREAMS, the name applied to 
sensations, thoughts and images 
which occur during sleep. Dreams 
and their meanings continue to 
occupy considerable attention of 
psychiatrists and psychoanalysts. 
They are believed to represent the 
repressed or inhibited fragments of 
a person’s reactions to his daily ex¬ 
periences. All people dream during 
sleep, but not all the dream activi¬ 
ties come into consciousness. The 
duration of the average dream is 
not known, but the study of brain 
waves during sleep indicates that 
there are at least several periods of 
sleep that are dreamless. 

The psychological forces ex¬ 
pressed in dreams are mostly emo¬ 
tional and often irrational. They may 
embody in condensed and distorted 
imagery hostile and sexual impulses, 

295 



DRESSINGS 


DROWNING 


fear, attitudes of dependence, feel¬ 
ings of humiliation and guilt. 
Dreams are frequently of a wish- 
fulfilling character; that is, they 
enable the individual to experience 
fulfillment of hopes and wishes that 
he might otherwise be unable to 
attain. 

Dreams can often be interpreted 
as to the meaning they represent and 
as to the underlying event that 
caused them. However, adequate in¬ 
terpretation is possible only if the 
psychoanalyst knows the patient 
well, the circumstances under which 
the dream occurred, and the patient’s 
immediate reactions to them. 

The large majority of dreams that 
children have are anxiety dreams, 
while a few are of the wish-fulfill¬ 
ment type. Young infants probably 
take their dreams for actuality and 
children of three or four have diffi¬ 
culty in separating their dreams 
from reality. As the individual 
matures, the relatively simple and 
transparent dreams of childhood 
take on a more definite character, 
but they are subject to greater dis¬ 
tortion. In late adolescence they 
acquire the full complexity and 
sophistication of adult dreams. 

DRESSINGS, materials used to pro¬ 
tect such injuries as bums, abrasions, 
and woun^. The most significant 
function of dressings is to protect the 
injured area from germs. 

Since moisture encourages the 
growth of germs, a dry dressing is 
usually preferable. When the wound 
is inflamed or encrusted, however, a 


wet dressing may be more soothing 
and better for cleansing purposes. 

Plain white dressings of lint, gauze, 
cotton, or wool, sterilized with heat 
and wrapped in antiseptic packages, 
may be purchased. These are useless, 
however, if contarrunated by unsteri- 
Uzed hands or brought into contact 
with any other unsterilized surface. 
Dressings may be stored in clean 
paper packages and kept in a suitable 
box, which is always tightly covered. 

DROPSY. See nephrosis. 

DROWNING, suffocation in water 
or other liquid, A person removed 
from the water may be alive, even 
though he appears to be dead. With¬ 
out delay his mouth should be cleared 
of any debris which he may have ac¬ 
quired in the straggle to breathe, and 
he should be placed on his stomach, 
the side of his head resting on his 
forearm. Artificial respiration should 
be given at once, for at least an hour, 
until the victim begins to breathe 
naturally, or the effort is found futile. 

As soon as the person regains con¬ 
sciousness, his blood circulation 
should be stimulated. He should be 
wrapped m dry blankets, warmed 
with hot-water bottles, if possible, 
and his limbs gently massaged. Stimu¬ 
lants, such as tea, coffee, brandy, or 
whiskey in water, may be given. 

Although the victim might appear 
to have recovered, he should not be 
permitted to walk alone. Instead, if 
at all possible, a stretcher of some 
type should be used. Once the person 
has been placed in bed, he must be 
carefully watched for at least an hour. 


296 



DRUG ADDICTION 


DUST 


since bis breathing might stop again, 
in which case it is essential to resume 
artificial respiration. 

In cases of drowning, every effort 
should be made to secure the services 
of a physician promptly. See also 
ARTIFICIAL respiration; ASPHYXIA*, 
RESUSCITATION. 

DRUG ADDICTION. Traffic in 
drugs constitutes a major problem for 
the federal authorities and, because 
of the alarming increase m youthful 
addicts, for parents and teachers as 
well. 

The loss of the power of self- 
control through drug addiction is not 
only harmful to the individual con¬ 
cerned, but also to society. A drug 
addict has such an overwhelming 
craving for the drug that he does not 
count the cost of getting it; crime, 
violence, and murder have been the 
price all too often. The addict devel¬ 
ops a tolerance to the drug so that 
increasing doses are necessary in 
order to produce the desired effect. 
When not under the influence of the 
drug the addict tends more and more 
to manifest typical disturbances of 
the nervous system. If drugs are with¬ 
drawn from the addict, characteristic 
withdrawal symptoms appear, with 
acute physical pain in addition to 
such symptoms as severe cramps in 
the abdomen and legs, muscular 
twitching, vomiting, and diarrhea. 
The addict will be irritable, restless, 
and unable to relax, and will break 
out in sweat and “goose pimples.” 
Rest and sleep are difficult or impos¬ 
sible to achieve. 


The chief drugs used by addicts 
are opium and its derivatives, mor¬ 
phine and heroin; cocaine; hashish; 
and marijuana made from hemp. The 
widespread use of bromides and bar¬ 
biturates, sedatives and sleeping pills 
available to the general public, has 
also raised problems. The barbitu¬ 
rates fulfill all the requirements of 
habit-forming drup. Overdose is of¬ 
ten fatal. Therefore legal control of 
the sale of the drugs has been tight¬ 
ened. 

Treatment for drug addiction is 
quite drastic and should be attempted 
only by qualified medical personnel 
with adequate facilities. The first step 
in treatment is withdrawal of the 
drug, abruptly, rapidly, or gradually, 
followed by a period of psycho¬ 
therapy and rehabilitation. This final 
period should last at least four 
months, otherwise there is an even 
greater danger of relapse to the ad¬ 
diction among most patients. Infor¬ 
mation regarding treatment is availa¬ 
ble from the U. S. Public Health 
Service in Washington, D.C. 

DT stands for delirium tremens. See 
DELIRIUM TREMENS. 

DUODENAL ULCER. See peptic 
ULCER. 

DUODENUM, the first portion of 
the small intestine, leading from the 
stomach. It contains the openinp of 
the pancreatic and the common bile 
ducts. See also intestines; peptic 

ULCER. 

DUST, fine pulverized powder of dry 

297 



DWARFISM 


DYSMENORRHEA 


earth or refuse, found all through the 
atmosphere except perhaps on moun¬ 
tain tops and out at sea. An atmos¬ 
phere free of dust is far healthier 
than one which is not. Nature and 
industry produce dusts of various 
kinds, against which people cannot 
wholly protect themselves. In some 
instances, dust may be disastrously 
harmful to human beings. 

Microscopic particles of pollen 
dust borne by wind come in contact 
with the mucous membranes of the 
eye and the respiratory tract and pro¬ 
duce symptoms of allergy such as 
seasonal hay fever, hives, and other 
disorders. Industrial dusts, produced 
by grinding of metals and in the 
manufacture of wood products, flour, 
sugar, textiles, leather, and feathers, 
also affect human beings. 

Most dusts contain some carbon 
and other organic matter. Many peo¬ 
ple are sensitive to dusts and have 
skin reactions when the dusts come 
in contact with the skin. Other dusts, 
when inhaled, irritate the windpipe 
and bronchial tubes. Coal dust may 
get mto the lungs causing pigmenta¬ 
tion, and may stimulate the produc¬ 
tion of fibrous tissue. Inorganic dusts 
containing free silica incite silicosis, 
a special form of change in the lungs. 
In silicosis the sUica acts to produce 
nodules throughout the lungs which 
can be detected by x-rays. Limgs 
damaged in this way are prone to 
secondary infections, including tu¬ 
berculosis. 

Organic dusts, like carbon, differ 
from inorganic dusts in that they do 
not cause the changes in the lungs 


such as are produced by the action of 
silica. Organic dust particles do not 
penetrate lung tissue, but instead are 
absorbed into the tissues of the body. 

Asbestosis is a special form of lung 
disorder in which the magnesium 
silicate contained in asbestos pro¬ 
duces fibrous changes that are differ¬ 
ent from those caused by pure silica. 
However, asbestosis and silicosis are 
much alike, both being forms of the 
lung disorder pneumoconiosis. 

To inhibit inhalation of dust, vari¬ 
ous forms of exhaust systems, air 
conditioning, and improved ventila¬ 
tion have been developed. Helmets 
and breathing devices worn by miners 
and workers employed in operations 
producing excessive dust have also 
been helpful. 

Drought areas are great dust pro¬ 
ducers; but the immediate health 
hazard, aside from the relationship 
between dust storms and secondary 
pneumonia, is not serious. More 
harmful are the mental and economic 
hardships suffered by people living 
in the dust-bowl region. See also 
asbestosis; bronchitis; industrial 
health; silicosis; tuberculosis. 

DWARFISM. See achondroplasia. 

DYSENTERY, inflammation of the 
colon. Its symptoms are pain and 
severe diarrhea wi^th frequent pas¬ 
sage of mucus and blood. See also 
AMEBIC dysentery; bacillary dys¬ 
entery. 

DYSMENORRHEA, pain at the 
time of menstruation. Discomfort 
in the lower abdomen or pains in the 
thighs and a general feeling of pres¬ 
sure may occur. The causes vary 


70 ^ 



DYSPEPSIA 


DYSPNEA 


from anatomic malformation, such 
as an undeveloped womb, to dis¬ 
turbances of hormone balance. If 
pain is constant or severe enough to 
cause nausea, vomiting, or headache, 
or to interfere with normal activity, 
the doctor should be consulted. Men¬ 
tal factors also may be responsible 
for unusual pain. Often the young 
girl has been prepared inadequately 
for womanhood. When the pain is 
not severe, the use of a mild sedative 
is helpful. 

Strenuous exercise immediately be¬ 
fore, during, and after menstruation 
has been known to produce a period 
of pain later. Therefore, most phy¬ 
sicians believe that violent exercise 
should be avoided. 


While mild non-habit-fonmng 
drugs are helpful, the use of habit- 
forming drugs is dangerous. The re¬ 
lationship between the sex functions 
and the action of various glands 
studied by the physician permits him 
to prescribe endocrine or glandular 
products which are helpful in con¬ 
trolling dysmenorrhea. See also 
MENSTRUATION. 

DYSPEPSIA. See indigestion. 

DYSPNEA, the medical term for 
diEBcult or labored breathing. This 
symptom occurs in attacks of asthma, 
acute laryngitis in children, cancer 
of the throat, weakness of the heart, 
and other conditions. See also aspira¬ 
tion. 


299 




EAR, an organ which performs the 
function of hearing and is involved 
with the sense of balance. It consists 
of three parts: the external, middle, 
and internal ears. The external ear 
comprises the outer ear and the 
external auditory canal. It collects 
sound and transmits the waves to 
the eardrum, the membrane that 
closes off the external ear. The mid- 
die ear, or internal tympanic cavity, 
contains bones and nerves for further 
transmission of soimd, and connects 
with the nasal passages through the 
Eustachian tube. The internal ear is 
a bony labyrinth, containing the 
nerves that connect with the brain, 
and three semicircular canals which 
control equilibrium. The entire inner 
ear structure is encased by the mas¬ 
toid region of the skull. Both ears, 
though related, function independ¬ 
ently, and if the capacity of one is 
destroyed that of the other is not 
necessarily impaired. 


A number of disorders may affect 
the ear. Earache is caused by inflam¬ 
mation which, even though slight, 
should be cared for promptly by a 
physician, since neglect may lead to 
serious complications and even mas- s 
toiditis. The external ear, because of 
its position, is susceptible to many 
kinds of bruises and abrasions, as 
well as infection and invasion by 
fungi and insects. Swellings or boils 
on the external ear should be treated 
by the doctor. Bony growths on the 
external ear, known as extosis, are 
best treated by surgical removal. Con¬ 
genital malformations are not infre¬ 
quent and have been effectively 
treated by plastic surgery. Plastic 
surgery has also been successful on 
cauliflower ear, which results from 
repeated blows, as experienced by 
boxers, or from other injury. 

The eardrum may also be subject 
to inflammation and is especially li¬ 
able to puncture or rupture. A sharp 


Cor A sectional diagtom of the human ear, showing the outer, middle and inner parts. 
The Eustachian tube connects the middle ear with the nasopharynx. 






EAR ear 



Ear — A simplified description of how we hear. Sound waves strike the ear drum which set 
off vibrations to the three smallest bones of the body, called the ossicles. These bones are 
also known as the hammer, anvil and stirrup because of their shape. The stirrup, in turn, 
vibrates the oval window — a thin membrane stretched across the entrance to the inner ear. 
Movement of the oval windows is passed on to the cochlea, the organ of hearing which "feels" 
the mechanical movements caused by the sound waves. This vibrating membrane contains 
thousands of tiny, hoir-like cells. It analyzes the vibrations received and sends the results to 
the brain via the eighth or hearing nerve. 


instrument should never be used to 
remove wax or a foreign substa^ice 
from the ear because of the danger 
of punctoing. An old saying is, 
“Never put anything in your ear 
smaller than your elbow.” 

Rupture of the eardrum may be 
caused by violent noise, such as an 
explosion, sharp descent from high 
altitude, diving mto deep water, or 
even sneezing. Bleeding of the ear, 
dizziness, ringing sounds, and head¬ 
ache may be symptoms of ruptured 
or punctured eardrum. Careful diag¬ 
nosis and patient treatment by an ear 
specialist generally corrects the con¬ 
dition. 

The middle ear can be infected 


from without, through a ruptured or 
punctured eardrum, or from within 
through the Eustachian tube. Head 
cold, respiratory infection, diseased 
tonsils and adenoids, inadequate nasal 
hygiene, forcible blowing of the nose 
may all cause infection of the middle 
ear. These infections may be acute, 
chronic, or temporary, draining or 
nondraining. Symptoms are shooting 
pains in the ear, infl amm ation, ring¬ 
ing sounds, or impaired hearing. All 
the symptoms are danger signals and 
require immediate attention. Since 
many cases of deafness among adults 
are traceable to middle ear infection 
in childhood, the condition must be 
treated promptly. Children should be 


302 


























































Ear — How noise disturbs hearing. Diagram indicates the distance at which ordinary speech 
can be heard under various conditions of noise and quiet. Persons who are hard ol hearing 
may find If difficult or impossible to hear within these distances. 


303 




ECCHYMOSfS 


ECTOPIC PREGNANCY 


taught ear hygiene as a guard against 
ear infection. 

In most cases of ear disorder, the 
minimum amount of manipulation is 
advisable, since the ear is a delicate 
and intricate organ through which 
infections can easily spread. Anti¬ 
biotics and sulfonamide drugs con¬ 
trol ear infection, thus preventing 
mastoiditis, once a fairly common 
sequel. See also deatness; mastoid; 
OTOSCLEROSIS. 

ECCHYMOSIS, the flow of blood 
into the surrounding tissues, after the 
rupture of a blood vessel. The term 
also applies to the discoloration of 
the skin caused by a hemorrhage 
under the skin, and to bruises which 
appear on the skin as the familiar 
black-and-blue spots after a blow and 
later turn brown, green, or yellow. 
See also bruises. 

ECLAMPSIA, a serious convulsive 
condition occurring in pregnancy in 
women of any age. The cause is not 
definitely known. The prospective 
mother may suffer convulsions lead¬ 
ing to unconsciousness. The first 
danger signal may be headache or 
failing vision. The blood pressure 
may rise sharply and albumin will 
appear in the urine. These early 
symptoms are pre-eclamptic. Scien¬ 
tific prenatal care includes constant 
guarding against this condition. 
Should any symptoms appear, pre¬ 
cautions must be taken at once to 
prevent eclampsia, which is serious 
and in the past often resulted in 
stillbirth. 

The woman shoidd be hospitalized 
promptly. The intake of salt is re¬ 
stricted and a soft diet prescribed. 

304 


Diuretic agents are given to induce 
sufficient elimination of urine, since 
in eclampsia the function of the 
kidneys is impaired and these organs 
must be relieved of any extra load. 
Anticonvulsant drugs are adminis¬ 
tered to control the tendency to con¬ 
vulsions. 

Fortunately the warning symptoms 
usually develop slowly. However, 
cases do occur in which serious 
complications closely follow the first 
symptoms. Most doctors believe that 
pregnancy itself is responsible for the 
development of toxic substances in 
the body. This toxic reaction may 
affect certain organs more than 
others, thus inducing pre-eclampsia 
or eclampsia itself. 

Improved methods of prenatal care 
in recent years have done much to 
prevent eclampsia and reduce the 
mortality rate from that cause. Fre¬ 
quent checking of blood pressure, 
periodic examination of the urine, 
and better weight control not only 
tend to improve the general condition 
of prospective mothers but make 
possible recognition of the pre¬ 
eclamptic state. 

Nevertheless, physicians are alwa5^ 
on guard against any eclamptic emer¬ 
gency that may arise. Extreme meas¬ 
ures, including the use of oxygen, in¬ 
duction of labor, and even Cesarian 
section may be necessary in severe 
eclampsia. Even after a child is bom, 
the mother must be just as carefully 
watched since pre-eclampsia and 
eclampsia occasionally occur immedi¬ 
ately following childbirth. 

ECTOPIC PREGNANCY, an un¬ 
usual form of pregnancy in which the 



ECZEMA 


ECZEMA 


fetus develops outside of the normal 
location, the uterus. It may occur, 
for instance, in the Fallopian tube. 
When ectopic gestation takes place 
the usual signs of pregnancy are 
present, though they may be over¬ 
looked. If a menstrual period is 
missed and slight bleedings begin to 
recur from the womb, a physician 
should be consulted. Prompt opera¬ 
tion is the advisable treatment. 

ECZEMA, a term which currently 
refeis to a noncontagious skin rash 
for which a definite cause cannot be 
cited. Thus, a rash which is produced 
by a certain type of soap might be 
described as dermatitis, but not as 
eczema. 

The possible causes of eczema, 
therefore, are always speculative. A 
change in the weather, in the tem¬ 
perature, or even in the intensity of 
light can be responsible. The cause 
may be found inside the body, per¬ 
haps in the contents of the blood, or 
possibly on the surface in the pres¬ 
ence of warts or calluses, or in sensi¬ 
tized skin. Moreover, the area of the 
body may be significant. Eczema of 
the scalp can differ greatly from 
eczema of the face or groin. The skm 
may be sensitive to certain textiles or 
chemicals. 

The symptoms of eczema are fre¬ 
quently associated with those of 
asthma, and often attack alternately, 
or they can appear at the same time. 
Moreover, both may start suddenly, 
with the swallowing of certain food 
or the inhalation of a particular sensi¬ 
tizing substance. Both diseases may 
involve an inherited liability. 

Often the first manifestation of 


eczema is on the face. The skin 
reddens, becomes swollen and hot, 
and small blisters appear which may 
join to form larger ones. These 
rupture eventually and release a 
sticky substance. As this Quid dries 
it forms a yellow crust which drops 
off after several da3^, revealing a 
reddened and scaling area under¬ 
neath. This scaling may continue for 
several days or weeks, after which 
the skin will recover its ordinary 
appearance. In the meantime, how¬ 
ever, a relapse may occur and the 
entire sequence of blistering and 
healing will be repeated. 

In children especially, the disease 
may spread and sometimes will cover 
the entire body. Often a high tem¬ 
perature is involved together with a 
disinclination to eat. The progress 
of the disease varies with the indi¬ 
vidual person; the blistering phase 
may predominate in one case, the 
dry and scaly phase in another, and 
the pimply stage in still another. Al¬ 
most always, however, the person will 
suffer from severe itching. Heat may 
increase this itching so that it be¬ 
comes almost unendurable. Eczema 
usually involves a thickening and 
breaking of the skin, and conse¬ 
quently the infected area is highly 
receptive to germs which may intro¬ 
duce complicating factors such as 
boils or impetigo. 

Since the possible causes are so 
numerous the treatment is often 
broad in scope. Although it may be 
impossible to identify the particular 
food which was responsible for the 
attack, nevertheless general dietary 
routine can be of considerable value. 


305 



EDEMA 


ELBOW 


If the attack is acute, a strictly liquid 
diet may even be imposed. The free 
consumption of water is ordinarily 
advised but stimulating beverages 
such as alcohol, tea, and coffee are 
seldom permitted. Medication is usu¬ 
ally employed for special purposes 
only, for the relief of itching, or for 
the drying of open blisters. Radium, 
x-rays or ultraviolet rays may be used 
with good effect. Recently the use of 
cortisone ointments has permitted 
prompt control of this condition. 

More than two-thirds of all skin 
diseases are classified as eczema. The 
symptoms and causes axe so complex 
that successful treatment demands a 
qualified physician. See also skin, 

EDEMA. See NEPHROSIS. 

EGGS of poultry are second only to 
milk in nutritive value, and many 
dieticians feel that every diet should 
include at least one egg a day. Eggs 
are rich in proteins, fats, phosphorus, 
iron, and in all the elements neces¬ 
sary for growth except calcium and 
vitamin C. They also contain choles¬ 
terol, a fatlike substance which may 
be involved in the growth of gall¬ 
stones, cysts, and cancerous tissue. 
For this reason eggs in large amounts 
are not recommended for persons 
over forty years of age; however, any¬ 
one in this age range can safely have 
an egg a day unless specifically for¬ 
bidden by a doctor. Ordinarily eggs 
are hi^y digestible; even a hard- 
boiled egg, especially a minced hard- 
boiled egg, is only slightly less di¬ 
gestible than a soft-boiled egg. Eggs 
may induce constipation, discomfort, 
asthma, or eczema in some persons 

306 


who presumably have become sensi¬ 
tized to eggs, perhaps only to the 
albumen. See also albumin; nutri¬ 
tion. 

ELBOW, the Joint at the middle of 
the arm where the large bone of 
the upper arm, the humerus, joins 
the two smaller bones of the lower 
arm, the radius and ulna. 

This joint can suffer any of the 
serious conditions that affect any 
other joint of the body. Dislocation 



Mck VlBWi 
jotnt extendkcC 



RI3ST ELBOW, ZIGST ELBOW, 

sicCf viQWy side mew^ ^ 

jo'^nt flexed joint extended 

ESbow — Drawings depicting the reiafion- 
ship of the bones in the elbow. The radius 
and ulna in the forearm meet the humerus 
(the single large bone in the upper arm) at 
the elbow. The large bone in the upper arm 
affords strength to the arm, while the two 
smaller bones in the forearm allow rotation. 
The ulna is the Inner bone which extends 
beyond the elbow joint. The radius is thicker 
and shorter than the ulna. 



ELECTRICAL INJURIES 


ELECTRICAL INJURIES 


is the most common disorder of the 
elbow and one of the most serious. 
Any dislocation should be examined 
immediately by x-ray and reset ac¬ 
cordingly. If necessary, the elbow 
should be put in a splint or placed in 
a cast un^ it is completely healed. 
Such care must be given only by a 
doctor. Ankylosis, or locking in place 
of the joint, may result from inflam¬ 
mation or infection. This condition 
requires the attention of an ortho¬ 
pedic surgeon who will not only treat 
but prescribe subsequent manipula¬ 
tion, massage, and application of 
heat to restore free movement and 
avoid permanent crippling. So-called 
“tennis elbow” results from over¬ 
activity in playing tennis or other 
sports or even nonathletic motion in¬ 
volving lifting, sudden pulling, or 
extending of the elbow joint. 

Besides injury involving the mus¬ 
cles and ligaments of the elbow joint, 
breaking or detachment of the small 
bones may cause pain and swelling. 
At the end of the elbow joint is the 
“funny bone,” which is actually not a 
bone but a particularly sensitive 
nerve; a sudden blow or pressure on 
it may cause considerable pain. 

In growing children, cartilage 
which controls growth of the bone 
at the elbow joint can also be 
damaged or dislocated. If damage 
does occur the cartilage most be 
replaced; if the cartilage is not re¬ 
placed, the arm will stop growing at 
the point where the epyphfeis (carti¬ 
lage) was damaged. See also disloca¬ 
tion; fractures; joints and joint 

DISORDERS. 

ELECnriUCAL INJURIES. Shock or 


injuries from electricity come from 
two major sources: accidental contact 
with electrical current and lightning 
strokes. Most of the fatal electrical 
accidents occur in industry, where 
electrical machinery and equipment 
are potential sources of accident to 
the worker. In the home, such acci¬ 
dents may result from faulty insula¬ 
tion or careless handling of lighting, 
heating, or refrigeration equipment. 

A person suffering from electric 
shock must be immediately removed 
from contact with the source of the 
electric current. If a live wire must 
be cut, an axe with a wooden handle 
is the best tool to use. If the rescuer 
cannot cut off the current, he must be 
careful to handle the victim with the 
aid of some insulating material such 
as a dry rope, a wooden stick, or a 
leather belt He must protect himself 
from receiving the shock which can 
be transmitted through the body of 
the victim. The doctor should be 
called immediately. H the person is 
unconscious or breathing has ceased, 
which is likely if the current has 
passed through the central nervous 
system and affected the respiratory 
center of the brain, artificial respira¬ 
tion should be given at once. Since 
artificial respiration may have to be 
continued for several hours, resusci¬ 
tating equipment should be sum¬ 
moned if possible. The clothing of the 
victim should be loosened to facilitate 
breatiiing and the victim allowed to 
rest several hours before he is moved 
to a hospital. 

When struck by lightning, the per¬ 
son falls to the ground as if he had 
received a stuiming blow on the head. 


307 



ELECTRIC SHOCK TREATMENT 


ELECTROCARDIOGRAPH 


After the shock, flashes of light seem 
to pass before his eyes and blindness 
or deafness can ensue. The nervous 
system may be dangerously affected 
with resulting sjTnptoms of paralj^is, 
pains in the limbs, and sometimes 
hemorrhage. 

Dry skin offers a high resistance to 
electricity and therefore the local 
bums following electric shock are 
greater and the general effects on 
the body less. Moist skin lessens 
resistance and permits the current to 
have a greater internal effect with 
chances of death more likely, al¬ 
though the surface bums may be 
less severe. However, the attempt to 
sustain the life of the victim should, 
of course, have precedence over any 


treatment of skin injuries. See also 
RESUSCITATION. 

ELECTRIC SHOCK TREATMENT. 
When electric shock therapy is given, 
two or more electrodes are placed on 
the sides of the head and a measured 
electric current is passed through the 
brain. This type of treatment is used 
in mental disturbances. The applica¬ 
tion of electric shock to induce loss of 
consciousness has resulted in dra¬ 
matic improvement for some persons, 
notably for those suffering severe 
depression, agitation, depression as¬ 
sociated with menopause and cata¬ 
tonic states of schizophrenia. 

ELECTROCARDIOGRAPH, an ap¬ 
paratus or instrument which records 


Eleetroeardioaraph - This technician is preparing a record of a patient's heart action 
with an electrocardiograph Small metal contacts, held in piace on the patient's chest hC 

^ ^ isible evide nce important in the diagnosis and controi of heart disease. 



'USb, 3 






ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY 

the electrical current created by the 
beating of the heart. Attached to the 
electrocardiograph are electrical con¬ 
ductors which are placed on each of 
the arms and the left leg. The cur¬ 
rents of the heartbeat are conducted 
to the electrocardiograph where they 
are photographed. This resulting rec¬ 
ord of waves is the electrocardio¬ 
gram. Several of these are made; one 
electrocardiogram is taken from the 
two arms, another from the left leg 
and right arm, and a third one from 
the left leg and left arm. Frequently 
a fourth picture is taken from the left 
leg and the top of the heart. The four 
photographs, although not identical, 
resemble one another. 

The electrocardiograph is exceed¬ 
ingly useful in diagnosis. It is invalu¬ 
able in the study of the heart, and in 
many diseases such as rheumatic 
fever. It aids in diagnosing suspected 
cases of coronary thrombosis, a dis¬ 
ease caused by clots of blood which 
block blood vessels leading to the 
heart and damage the muscle and in¬ 
duce rhythm breaks and other irregu¬ 
larities in the flow of the blood. See 
also CORONARY THROMBOSIS; HEART; 
RHEUMATIC FEVER. 

ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY, 
a method of recording the electrical 
activity of the brain, especially of the 
cerebral cortex. The electrical im¬ 
pulses are detected by means of wires 
attached to the scalp and are recorded 
graphically in waves (EEG). Valua¬ 
ble information is gathered by this 
method in case of tumor, epilepsy, 
infections, and hemorrhages. The ap¬ 
paratus used is known as an electro- 


EMACfATiON 

encephalograph. It is also useful in 
locating a diseased portion of the 
brain, if not too deeply seated. 

ELEPHANTIASIS, a chronic disease 
characterized by inflammation of the 
lymphatic glands. As the condition 
progresses, the skin becomes thick¬ 
ened, the tissues under the skin swell, 
and, in time, the parts of the body 
affected enlarge incredibly. The legs, 
for example, may resemble the legs 
of an elephant, whence the name, 
elephantiasis. Any part of the body 
may be affected, but enlargement of 
the arms, legs, or scrotum is most 
common. The breasts of women are 
less susceptible. 

The disease occurs usually as a 
secondary effect of filariasis. The 
filaria, a parasite, gets into the lymph 
ducts and blocks them. However, 
blocking of the lymphatics by other 
means can also produce elephantiasis. 

Elephantiasis, for the most part, 
is a disease of the tropics and a 
person may have it for many years. 
While medical treatment of the con¬ 
dition itself is ineffective, tight band- 
aging and surgery can often reduce 
the deformities of the disease. Con¬ 
trol of the mosquitoes that bear the 
parasite and of the worm responsible 
for the disease seem to be the best 
long-range methods of inhibiting 
elephantiasis. See also filariasis. 

EMACIATION, extreme thinness. 
Emaciation may have many causes, 
including a psychological basis. For 
example, a person suffering from de¬ 
pression may refuse to eat and waste 
away to the point of emaciation. 
Ordinarily the cause is basically 


309 



EMBOLISM 


EMBOLISM 


physical, and is lisuaiiy due to a de¬ 
generative disease of the muscles. 
Emaciation can also result from any 
degenerative disease of the spinal 
cord. 

Diabetes, syphilis, or a growth in 
the gullet may cause emaciation. 
Persistent tuberculosis, in any part of 
the body will eventually cause ex¬ 
treme thinn ess. In addition, emacia¬ 
tion may also be produced by such 
diseases as cholera, extended diar¬ 
rhea, disturbances of the th3troid 
glands, or even by extreme fever. 

In the first six months of an 
infant’s life, severe emaciation may 
seem to develop without any cause. 
The term “marasmus” is applied to 
this condition. Ordinarily the cause 
will be foimd in the baby’s diet, and 
a change of diet will bring a cure. 

Generally the treatment in cases of 
extreme emaciation varies greatly and 
depends on the source of the ailment. 
See also ATROPHY. 

EMBOLISM, obstruction of a blood 
vessel by a blood clot or by any 
foreign matter floating loose in the 
blood stream. An embolus, as the 
clot or particle is known, is dangerous 
because it may lodge in an important 
arterial blood vessel or vein and block 
the supply of blood to an organ or 
tissue on which life depends, such as 
the brain, heart, kidney, or lungs. 
If an embolus reaches a vital area of 
the brain, paralysis and even death 
may follow in a few hours. Embolism 
in the eye may cause blindness. 

An air bubble may drculate 
throu^ the blood and, if large 
enou^ block a blood vessel. A bit 


of fat may get loose in the blood 
stream following fracture of a large 
bone. A collection of germs from an 
abscess may get into a small blood 
vessel, plug it, interrupt circulation, 
and produce a secondary abscess. 
Any of these disturbances is called 
embolism. 

In endocarditis, an inflammation of 
the lining of the heart, incrustations 
and growth may develop on the 
valves of the heart. These break off 
and get into the blood stream, and 
cause embolism. The two types of 
endocarditis are the acute, which 
arises suddenly and may cause death 
within a few days, and the subacute, 
which begins slowly and responds to 
early treatment. 

The early sintnptoms of embolism 
are a slight rise in temperature and a 
rapid increase in the pulse beat. 
Within twenty-four hours, however, 
both the temperature and pulse rise 
rapidly, breathing becomes rapid, and 
the person has great mental anxiety 
and symptoms of shock. In post¬ 
operative embolus, the s5rmptoms may 
be sudden paUor, rapid pulse, and 
collapse. 

People past middle life are more 
prone to embolism than younger 
persons. Those who have had disturb¬ 
ances of the heart are affected fre¬ 
quently rather than those whose blood 
circulation has been normal. 

Among the methods of treatment 
of embolism recently developed is an 
immediate surgical operation to re¬ 
lease the blocked area, especially 
when the embolus occurs in the arms, 
legs, or in a region which can be 
reached. The development of such 


310 



EMBRYO 


EMERGENCIES IN THE HOME 


drags as dicumarol, heparin, and 
others which have the power to pre¬ 
vent blood clotting has been invalua¬ 
ble. Antibiotics have been useful also 
in the treatment of chronic bacterial 
endocarditis, thus lessening the dan¬ 
ger of embolus. 

EMBRYO, a young organism in the 
earliest stage of development. In the 
human being, embryo refers to the 
organism during its first three months 
of life in the mother’s womb. See also 
FETUS. 

EMERGENCIES IN THE HOME. 
At least one person in every house¬ 
hold should know the basic rules of 
emergency care. 

Falls. Of the millions of serious 
accidents which occur in the home 
every day, almost fifty per cent are 
due to falls. The first rule to observe 
when a person has fallen is to esti¬ 
mate the extent of his injuries, 
whether or not he has suffered a 
broken bone, a hemorrhage, or just 
a bruise. 

Usually, a broken bone can be 


recognized immediately by failure of 
the limb to function. A final diag¬ 
nosis, however, can only be made by 
a doctor with the help of an x-ray 
machine. While awaiting the doctor, 
the injured limb can be placed in a 
homemade splint if there is someone 
present able to do it. The splint may 
be made by wrapping the limb in a 
large-sized magazine or equivalent 
which is then tied in place by means 
of handkerchiefs or strips of material. 

A minor hemorrhage can be con¬ 
trolled by placing a piece of gauze 
against the wound. If the hemorrhage 
is more severe, pressure against the 
gauze may be necessary to control 
the bleeding. A tourniquet should be 
used with extreme caution. How¬ 
ever, if one is absolutely necessary, 
it is applied in the following manner. 
A large handkerchief or towel is tied 
around the arm or leg above the 
hemorrhage. A small rod of any 
type, a clothespin or stick for ex¬ 
ample, is then inserted under the 
handkerchief. On the other side of 
the limb the handkerchief is tied in a 



Emergencies in the Home — Some areas of the body are difficult to bandage. On the left 

is the four-failed bandage in place on the chin. This is a good emergency bandoge. On the 
right is the modified Barton bandage. It may be used with or without plaster. 


311 



EMERGENCIES IN THE HOME 

knot and a larger rod is inserted 
througli this knot in such a way that 
the tourniquet can be easily tightened, 
thus closing off the flow of blood. 

A bleeding tooth socket can be 
controlled by filling the socket with 
antiseptic cotton. Nosebleed may or¬ 
dinarily be halted by placing the vic¬ 
tim face down and then stuflSng the 
nostrils with gauze, or sometimes 
application of hot and cold packs will 
bring about the same result. If plac¬ 
ing gauze on a scalp wound fails to 
stop the bleeding, a tight band wound 
all the way around the head may be 
successful. A real danger is unex¬ 
pected hemorrhage of the lung. A 
doctor should be called and the per¬ 
son placed in bed and kept absolutely 
quiet. 

A bruise is an injury caused by 
impact in which neither laceration or 
external bleeding occurs. The first 
symptom, pain, is usually followed 
by redness and swelling. Since blood 
under the surface has entered the 
tissue, the skin may become black 
and blue, and, later, brown and 
yellow. Though bruises do not ordi¬ 
narily require treatment, ice packs 
will often lessen the pain. The pain 
and discolor of a black eye, which 
is a type of bruise, will often d iminis h 
if iced compresses are applied. Later, 
when the blackness appears, hot 
compresses for half-hour intervals 
are more effective. 

Foreign bodies. Foreign bodies 
accidentally penetrating any orifice 
of the human body ordinarily should 
be extracted promptly. This must be 
done gently, however, since violence 
might do more harm than good. 


EMERGENCIES IN THE HOME 

An infant who has swallowed a 
foreign object should be laid face 
down, or held head down, so that he 
can cough up the object. If anything 
is caught in the nostril, blowing the 
nose or sneezing may help to extract 
it. Usually, however, the best solution 
is to call the doctor. When a foreign 
object lodges in the ear, an insect, for 
example, it may often be removed by 
filling the ear with warm oil. The 
insect cannot live in oil and when it 
dies it can be floated out with warm 
water. 

Parents are justifiably frightened 
when a child swallows a broken piece 
of glass, a pin, or some foreign sub¬ 
stance. If small, the object may pass 
from the body as part of a bowel 
movement. 

A tiny particle in the eye may 
often be removed with the tip of a 
clean handkerchief. If it is under the 
lid, however, the most common 
method of removal is to turn the eye¬ 
lid up over a small rod, such as a 
match. 

These suggestions do not apply, 
however, to a speck which appears 
on the eyeball itself. When this hap¬ 
pens, the wisest course is to place a 
pad of wet gauze over the entire eye, 
call a doctor promptly and keep the 
person quiet until he arrives. Such 
an accident is often extremely pain¬ 
ful. 

One should never attempt to puU 
a fishhook out the way it went in. 
Rather, it should be pushed all the 
way through and snipped off at the 
end. It may then be pulled out with¬ 
out damaging the flesh. 


312 



EMERGENCIES !N THE HOME 

Wounds. A wound is an injury in¬ 
volving a break in the skin. Before 
caring for a wound, the person in 
charge should wash his hands thor¬ 
oughly in soap and water, and per¬ 
haps also in alcohol. Any object 
applied to the wound should also be 
sterilized and cloth which is used 
as a bandage ought to be thoroughly 
boiled. Packages of sterilized band¬ 
ages may be purchased at a drug¬ 
store or other shops. 

After the wound has been washed 
in soap and water, or in some suitable 
mild solution, it should be treated 
with iodine or alcohol and then 
covered with a sterile dressing. If 
any pus appears in the wound, be 
sure to call a physician. If this is 
impossible, the pus should be re¬ 
moved before treating the wound, 
even if it is necessary to open the 
wound for this purpose. 

Burns. Among the possible causes 
of bums are scalding water, hot irons, 
electricity and unexpected match 
blazes. Bums involving more than 
half the body are usually fatal. Any 
person who has been burned severely 
will suffer shock as weU as physical 
damage and requires the immediate 
attention of a physician. Little can be 
done by the layman except to make 
the victim as comfortable as possible. 

If a person has suffered lesser 
bums, however, the injured area may 
be covered at once with cold water 
or vinegar. Petroleum jelly can be 
used at a later stage. The wounds 
should never be covered with any¬ 
thing since these articles cannot be 
removed without doing serious dam¬ 
age to the tissues. 


EMERGENCIES IN THE HOME 



Emergettey Tre0tmeiits — AppHcatiors of 
a tourniquet between the bleeding point 
and the body. A stick is placed in the knot 
so that when it is twisted the tourniquet will 
be tightened and the bleeding controlled. 
Pressure should be relieved at regular inter¬ 
vals to prevent gangrene. 

Bums caused by nitric or sulphuric 
acid should be washed at once to re¬ 
move the acid. This may be done 
with a solution of bicarbonate of 
soda. If possible, the wound should 
then be permitted to soak in the 
same solution for as long as possible. 

Injuries from firework, guns, cap 
pistols and similar toys are no longer 
as common as they were in the past. 
Here the greatest danger is the possi¬ 
bility of lockjaw, a disease in which 
germs, having entered a wound, are 
sealed in. A doctor is desirable be¬ 
cause the wound must be cleansed, 
after which the victim may possibly 
need lockjaw antitoxin. 

Resuscitation. Asphyxiation, suffo¬ 
cation due to deficiency of oxygen, is 
often caused by drowning, electric 


313 


EMERGENCIES IN THE HOME EMERGENCIES IN THE HOME 


shock or by carbon monoxide gas. 
When a person has been under water 
for as long as five minutes artificial 
resuscitation is probably the quickest 
method of attempting to save his 
life. The most widely accepted 
method of artificial respiration, or 
resuscitation, is the direct mouth to 
mouth breathing, using a special 
tube if available. This operation may 
usually be continued for at least an 
hour, or until the breathing has been 
restored. The person should be kept 
under close observation afterward, 
in case he should again cease to 
breathe. 

If a person has suffered electric 
shock, the first step is always to re¬ 
move the victim from the cause. 
Since every second counts and there 
is usually no time to turn off the cur¬ 
rent, the quickest solution is to throw 
a coat or similar article of clothing 
around the body of the victim and 
so pull him away from the current. 
Artificial respiration should then be 
administered until the doctor arrives. 

Preventive action is the best 
method of avoiding death by carbon 
monoxide gas. Windows should al¬ 
ways be kept open and an engine 
should never be permitted to run in 
a closed garage. Those who are espe¬ 
cially sensitive to carbon monoxide 
gas should avoid any occupation in 
which such gas is prevalent. 

The first symptoms of monoxide 
poisoning are headache, faintness, 
nervousness and irritability. An ap¬ 
parent victim of carbon monoxide 
poisoning shoxdd be removed at once 
to frrah air and kept quiet and warm. 
If possible, while awaiting the doctor. 


the patient should be covered with 
hot-water bottles or blankets to pre¬ 
vent pneumonia. At the same time, 
artificial respiration should be admin¬ 
istered. 

Fainting. If a person has fainted, 
a physician should be called. WTiile 
awaiting his arrival, the victim should 
be placed flat on his back in the 
coolest location possible. If the face 
is pale, the head shoxild be brought 
as low as possible in relation to the 
rest of the body. If the face is red, 
however, the head may be moved to a 
position somewhat higher than that 
of the rest of the body. Cold water 
may be applied to the face or chest, 
and smelling salts or a teaspoonful of 
aromatic spirits of ammonia in a 
tumbler of water may be given. 

Heat Stroke. Heat stroke may oc¬ 
cur, not only in tropical weather, but 
in any area, a laundry or kitchen, for 
example, where the heat is intense. 
Persons working under such condi¬ 
tions should take salt tablets at regu¬ 
lar intervals throughout the day. 

The signs to watch for in heat 
stroke are dizziness, drowsiness and 
fast breathing. When the attack oc¬ 
curs, it is essential to transfer the vic¬ 
tim at once to a cool place and then 
keep him flat on his back and abso¬ 
lutely quiet. Sponging with cool water 
will help to control the temperature, 
and the circulation may be stimulated 
with coffee or other drugs. 

Some authorities advise that the 
victim of heat stroke be placed on a 
bed covered with a large rubber 
sheet, and his entire body then 
rubbed with ice until the tempera¬ 
ture drops to 101 . At that point, the 


314 



EMERGENCIES iN THE HOME 


EMERGENCIES IN THE HOME 


cold treatment is terminated and the 
patient is covered with blankets. If 
breathing stops, it is necessary to 
administer artificial respiration at 
once. 

Bite Wounds. If a person has been 
stung by a bee or similar insect, the 
sting should be removed at once and 
a drop or two of diluted ammonia 
water placed on the wound. When a 
more serious bite has occurred, how¬ 
ever, such as that of a centipede, 
spider or scorpion, bleeding should 
at first be encouraged as a means of 
removing the poison. Later, iodine 
may be applied, together with a cold 
pack to ease the pain. The sting of 
the black widow spider requires the 
additional attention of a physician 
who may employ a local anesthetic 
and also administer adrenalin to con¬ 
strict the blood vessels so that the poi¬ 
son will not spread. 

The treatment for a dog bite is 
the same as that which is given for 



Emergency Treatnieiits — Seriously in¬ 
jured persons should not be moved until 
medico! ossistonce arrives. If if is imperative 
that the patient be moved, the method of 
carrying shown above should be used. 


any infected wound. If there is any 
likelihood of hydrophobia, however, 
the wound shorrid be cauterized by a 
doctor and the dog reported to the 
city authorities at once. 

Hiccups. A hiccup is an involun¬ 
tary spasm of the diaphragm, causing 
an inhalation which is suddenly 
stopped by the closing of the glottis. 
A characteristic sound is involved. 

Popular cures for hiccups often 
involve the use of a ruse which is 
calculated to distract the victim’s at¬ 
tention from his affliction. If the con¬ 
dition persists, a doctor must be con¬ 
sulted. See mccups. 

Migraine or Sick Headache. Mi¬ 
graine may have its source in sensi¬ 
tivity to food, in a disease of the 
stomach or brain, in hardening of the 
arteries, in disturbances of vision, in 
menstruation, or in mental problems. 
Sometimes the cause cannot be deter¬ 
mined. 

The headache wiU either come sud¬ 
denly or its approach may be her¬ 
alded by a feeling a depression, per¬ 
haps a disinclination to work or to 
carry on dafly activities. 

Wien the migraine headache actu¬ 
ally strikes, the victim is usually re¬ 
quired to lie down in a darkened 
room in absolute quiet. Often the pa¬ 
tient is so uncomfortable that he re¬ 
jects any assistance or attention. 
Drugs provide a satisfying relief for 
migraine and may become habitual 
unless their use is carefully super¬ 
vised by a physician. 

Food Poisoning. When a person 
appears to have eaten poisoned food, 
an attempt should be made at once 


315 



EMOTIONAL HEALTH 


EMOTIONAL HEALTH 


sonable. The term phobia is applied 
when there exists an extreme fear 
not objectively based on the danger 
involved. Fear of open spaces, fear 
of closed spaces, fear of infection, 
and fear of light are some of the 
many phobias that have been de¬ 
scribed in long technical terms. 
Sometimes these unreasonable fears 
seem related to early conditioning 
experiences. Unconscious factors, 
however, probably cause most pho¬ 
bias. 

Apathy, Whereas the forms of ab¬ 
normal emotional response previ¬ 
ously described have been too 
strong, another form exists in which 
there is too little emotional response. 
The emotions are dulled; nothing 
seems to matter to the person; he is 
completely indifferent to circum¬ 
stances and events that to others 
have a strong emotional tone. He is 
emotionally dull and does not have 
strong feelings of any type. At times 
of great physical fatigue or after 
prolonged severe illness, the normal 
person may know these feelings. 
But with returning physical vigor, 
the feelings disappear. Abnormal 
apathy, however, cannot adequately 
be explained by such physical fac¬ 
tors. 

Depression, Occasional moments 
of depression are part of normal ex¬ 
perience but depression as an ab¬ 
normal symptom has certain iden¬ 
tifying features. It is prolonged, 
overwhelming, without sufficient 
cause, and may lead to suicidal at¬ 
tempts. A depressed person has a 
feeling of worthlessness and failure, 


is weighed down by sadness which 
he may or may not try to justify. He 
may say, “I don’t know why I feel 
so sad and blue,” or he may attribute 
his gloom to some trivial happening 
in the past. The feeling of hopeless¬ 
ness pervades all waking experience 
and he becomes retarded in activity 
and unresponsive to his immediate 
environment. 

Furor, Exaggerated or even ex¬ 
plosive outbursts of rage and anger 
are given the psychiatric label of 
furor. This symptom may occur in 
schizophrenia, epilepsy, senility, and 
in some other organic disorders. In 
such attacks, a person may be wildly 
destructive. Hospitalization and con¬ 
trol by experts is a must. Such be¬ 
havior is, fortunately, extremely 
rare as a symptom in the field of 
mental disturbance, although it was 
the basis of the stereotyped popular 
view in years past of the way people 
in mental‘hospitals act. This stereo¬ 
type is, however, what people have 
in mind when they think that they 
are “going insane” or are worried 
and ashamed because some member 
of their family needs psychiatric 
care. Most people are surprised at 
the relatively peaceful and serene 
atmosphere of a psychiatric ward. 
See also anxiety; mentat depres¬ 
sion. 

EMOTIONAL HEALTH. A per¬ 
son’s emotional health may be de¬ 
fined as the characteristic way in 
which he perceives, reacts to, and 
solves the main problems of life. 
The problems of life can be classi¬ 
fied into three basic categories: 


318 




1« Boild emotional stability by creating 
a warm home atmosphere. 



Provide satisfying recreation for 

youth 


(1) problems of biological and phys¬ 
ical needs such as food, clothing, 
and shelter; (2) problems deter¬ 
mined by cultural demands and 
prohibitions; (3) problems of in¬ 
ternal psychological needs such as 
the need for security, love, belong¬ 
ing, self-esteem, independence, 
achievement, and adequacy. 

Disturbances or conflicts in the 



Rocognize that mootal illnoss can bo 
troatod soccossfuily-and 

you can help! 



5* Participate actively in your com¬ 
munity campaign for mental health. 

manner of satisfying these needs 
may produce acute symptoms of 
mental or emotional illness or may 
become habitual modes of behavior 
called character disturbances. How¬ 
ever, there is no fine dividing line 
between emotional health and emo¬ 
tional illness, or between normality 
and abnormality. Emotional health 
depends not only on the individual, 

319 





iMOTlONS AMB ALLERGY 

but also on the particular situation 
in which he finds himself. Under 
extreme conditions of hardship, 
every individual can reach a point 
of emotional breakdown. Studies of 
prisoners of war have shown that 
conditions of extreme physical and 
mental stress can precipitate serious 
mental disturbances. 

It is impossible to understand 
emotional health without reference 
to the cultural and social back¬ 
ground of the individual. Certain 
societies stress ambition, the accu¬ 
mulation of wealth and aggressive 
behavior as important. Other so¬ 
cieties expect the individual to show 
no strong ambition, to refrain from 
aggressive behavior, and to cooper¬ 
ate with other members of the so¬ 
ciety. Even within a particular 
society attitudes vary as to what is 
normal and abnormal behavior. In 
various parts of the United States, 
for example, the attitudes to the 
relationships between the sexes vary 
a great deal. In some portions of 
the country it would be considered 
a gross violation of domestic rela¬ 
tions for a married man to have 
lunch with a married woman other 
than his wife. In other branches of 
American society, particularly in 
large cities, such meetings are with¬ 
in the pattern of everyday social 
existence. Normality within a so¬ 
ciety is relative also to social status, 
age, and sex. Behavior that is heal¬ 
thy in the preadolescent of nine 
years ol age may be unquestionably 
unhealthy in an individual of forty. 

Although the difference between 


EMOTIONS AND ALLERGY 

emotional health and emotional ill¬ 
ness is often one of degree rather 
than kind, for practical reasons this 
difference is very important. Many 
people have minor emotional dis¬ 
turbances that are not easily recog¬ 
nized, but because of their effects 
on the general health have medical 
signficance. There are people in all 
walks of life who suffer from diffi¬ 
culties of adjustment to their en¬ 
vironment. The anxieties, frustra¬ 
tions, and fears that stem from daily 
life experiences may appear as head¬ 
aches, ulcers of the stomach, 
asthma, or similar conditions. With 
the rapid advancement of medicine, 
people today live much longer than 
was common fifty years ago; as a 
result, cases of emotional disturb¬ 
ances at later age levels have great¬ 
ly multiplied and have created a 
need for psychiatric help. See also 
anxiety; emotion; hysteria; men¬ 
tal depression; psychosomatic 
disorders; stress. 

EMOTIONS AND ALLERGY^ Re¬ 
cently attention has been focused on 
the part that emotional or psycho¬ 
logical factors play in allergic dis¬ 
ease. At present, a complete answer 
has not been reached. To say that 
asthma, hives, and eczema, for ex¬ 
ample, are purely psychosomatic dis¬ 
eases is contrary to the experience 
and opinions of most allergists and 
psychiatrists. But to ignore emo¬ 
tional stresses also is unrealistic. Per¬ 
sons with allergic disease are ill, dis¬ 
turbed, uncomfortable, anxious, and 
apprehensive just as are those with 


320 



EMPHYSEMA 


EMPHYSEMA 


other illnesses. Their symptoms ma> 
become more severe or may even be 
precipitated by situations of emo¬ 
tional stress. Most such persons are 
allergic to begin with and their 
tolerance or reactivity is unbalanced, 
so they reproduce their basic disease 
under conditions of anxiety, dis¬ 
pleasure, frustration, and insecurity. 
Allergic people can change their en¬ 
vironment but they cannot run away 
from their allergic constitution. The 
same stress situation in nonallergic 
persons rarely if ever produces those 
diseases classified as allergic in 
nature. 

Many nonspecific causes of flare- 
ups of allergic disease are recognized 
besides emotions. The physical ef¬ 
fects of heat, cold, or barometric 
pressure may induce an asthmatic 
attack in an asthmatic person. Ir¬ 
ritant smokes, dusts, fumes, or odors 
may have a similar effect. Com¬ 
monly the onset of an infectious dis¬ 
ease such as a common cold may 
irritate an allergic response of some 
nature. 

There are many vagaries to al¬ 
lergic diseases. A person may not 
have any evidence of hay fever until 
late in life. Some with severe hay 
fever or asthma may suddenly or 
gradually lose their disease for rea¬ 
sons still unknown. Some may have 
long periods of remission and then 
have their symptoms recur just as 
suddenly as they disajjpeared. 
Women commonly have an increase 
in manifestations of allergic illnesses 
prior to their menstrual periods and 
many are completely relieved during 


pregnane). One member of a family 
may be afflicted and others not, or 
different members of the same fam¬ 
ily may have different forms of al¬ 
lergic disease. The same allergen 
may produce completely different 
types of disease in different persons. 
Allergy is a vital and provoking 
process. The condition still is in its 
early stages of recognition, implica¬ 
tion, and understanding. A tremen¬ 
dous amount of knowledge has been 
acquired by biochemists, immunol¬ 
ogists, pathologists, botanists, and 
clinicians and this knowledge has 
been utilized with success by prac¬ 
ticing physicians. There are, how¬ 
ever, many gaps in what we know 
about allergy. Many answers will 
need to be found before there is a 
final satisfactory and completely 
successful control of allergic dis¬ 
eases. See also allergy. 
EMPHYSEMA, the condition wMch 
exists when the normal air spaces in 
the lungs are dilated and the walls 
are overdistended. Various types of 
this disease are related to different 
causes. An obstruction of the breath¬ 
ing due to asthma or to chronic 
bronchitis or coughing produced by 
any one of a number of lung diseases 
may cause the walls of the small cells 
in the lungs to stretch and air to ac¬ 
cumulate, The stretching occurs 
chiefly along the margins and upper 
edges of the lung where the muscular 
and bony framework of the lung less 
adequately support it. The stretching 
tends to destroy the elasticity of the 
breathing cells and causes distention 
of the lung. 


321 



EMPYEMA 


ENCEPHALmS 


Among the s5miptoms of emphy¬ 
sema are breathlessness on exertion 
and cough. The cough generally is 
due to chronic inflammation of the 
bronchial tubes. Cold air, dust, or 
exercise may start a coughing spell in 
the irritated tissues. A person with 
emphysema usually has a large barrel¬ 
shaped chest and prominent bones. 
The disease can be relieved by treat¬ 
ment of the asthma, bronchitis, or 
other chronic condition that causes 
it. Medical treatment of the cough 
which produces the distention is 
beneficial. Sometimes a properly 
fitted binder that sustains the chest 
walls without interfering with the 
movement of the ribs helps to con¬ 
trol emphysema. 

Mediastinal emphysema is caused 
by the introduction of air into the 
midchest region by a blow, strain, or 
coughing. It may result also from 
puncture wounds, or from incorrect 
use of machines for artificial respira¬ 
tion. Symptoms include swelling of 
the neck and occasionally of the 
whole face and chest. If the condi¬ 
tion interferes with breathing, the air 
can be withdrawn by an operation. 
However, if the amount of air in the 
tissues becomes so great as to inter¬ 
fere with the circulation to the heart 
and lungs, death may result. 

In older people, chronic emphy¬ 
sema may exist because of inelasticity 
and weakness of the lung tissues. 
However, the cough generally is not 
as severe as in the case of younger 
people suffering from emphysema. A 
really effective treatment for emphy¬ 
sema associated with old age has not 
as yet been found. 


EMPYEMA, a medical term sig¬ 
nifying pus in a cavity or organ, espe¬ 
cially in the chest cavity, the gall¬ 
bladder, or in the pericardium which 
envelops the heart. Usually empyema 
is associated with infections of the 
lung and is called suppurative pleur¬ 
isy. 

Pleural empyema affects children 
more often than adults. Frequently it 
occurs in connection with pneumonia 
or influenza, particularly when the 
influenza virus is accompanied by a 
secondary infection of streptococci, 
staphylococci, or other pus-forming 
germs. Occasionally the tuberculosis 
germ may be present and fungi of 
various kinds may also be found. 
Empyema may also fbllow an injury 
or wound to the chest and lung. 

Symptoms of empyema in influ¬ 
enza or pneumonia may be a sudden 
rise of fever, pain or interference 
with chest movement in breathing. If 
examination shows an accumulation 
of fluid, the doctor can confirm his 
diagnosis by tapping the chest wall 
with a needle. If the amount of fluid 
is so large as to cause pressure on the 
heart and lungs, prompt removal of 
the fluid is absolutely necessary. 
Most of the infectious material can 
be withdrawn with the needle and a 
cure effected by the reinjection of 
antiseptics or other substances to 
combat the infection. In extreme 
cases, however, surgical operation 
may be necessary. The prompt use of 
sulfa drugs and antibiotics has made 
sxxrgery unnecessary when empyema 
is detected early. 

ENCEPHALITIS, often called 


322 



ENDAiliilTIS 


ENDOCARDITIS 


“sleeping sickness,” an inflammation 
of the brain which causes drowsiness 
and slowing down of mental and 
physical faculties. A number of dis¬ 
tinct types of encephalitis are known, 
most of them caused by viruses. The 
condition sometimes occurs as a com¬ 
plication of another infectious dis¬ 
ease, such as meningitis or measles, 
or may arise from poisoning or in¬ 
fection of a wound. Virus encephali¬ 
tis should not be confused with Afri¬ 
can sleeping sickness, which is due 
to a parasite, trypanosoma, carried 
by the tsetse fly. 

One of the viruses responsible for 
encephalitis, equine encephalomyeli¬ 
tis, also affects horses, birds, mice, 
snakes, and possibly other animals. 
Since 1931, when it first occurred in 
California, the disease has appeared 
spasmodically in both human beings 
and horses and other animals. Some¬ 
times it has reached epidemic pro¬ 
portions within a two-month period, 
and at other times has appeared in 
sporadic cases in a few scattered 
areas. 

Another form of encephalitis ap¬ 
peared in a major epidemic in St. 
Louis during the summer of 1933 
and has since been called St. Louis 
encephalitis. Still another form, post¬ 
infection encephalitis, occurs during 
the course of or follows an infectious 
disease such as measles or influenza. 
Sometimes it has appeared after vac¬ 
cination against rabies, smallpox, or 
measles. Postinfection encephalitis, 
which is less common than the other 
types, attacks persons of all ages, al¬ 
though children are most susceptible. 


There is no evidence that this type is 

contagious. 

Symptoms of encephalitis vary 
greatly, depending on the severity of 
the infection and the area of the 
brain and nervous system affected. 
The illness may be brief and mild or 
severe and lengthy. Acute forms usu¬ 
ally begin with Mgh fever and head¬ 
ache, dizziness, vomiting, and pain 
and stiffness of the neck and back. 
Drowsiness, stupor, and weakness of 
the eye muscles are common symp¬ 
toms. In severe cases, delirium, con¬ 
vulsions and insomnia are present. 

Damage to the nervous system is 
the greatest danger in encephalitis. 
Parkinson’s disease (shaking palsy or 
paralysis agitans) may follow an at¬ 
tack and sometimes a deterioration 
of mental faculties. Behavior dis¬ 
orders may develop in children who 
have had encephalitis. 

In general, treatment consists in re¬ 
lieving pain and headache, reducing 
the fever, and making the patient as 
comfortable as possible. The physi¬ 
cian may prescribe sedatives for rest¬ 
lessness and other drugs for msoinnia 
or delirium. Special nursing care and 
regular supervision by the physician, 
even after the severe stage has sub¬ 
sided, are essential, 

EIWARIEEmS, mflammation of 
the inner wall of an artery which 
occurs in certain types of endocardi¬ 
tis. See also arteriosclerosis ; endo ¬ 
carditis. 

ENBOCARDUISj inflammation of 
the lining of the heart. See also 


323 



ENDOCARDIUM 


ENEMA 


BACTERIAL ENDOCARDITIS; EMBOLISM; 

heart; rheumatic fever. 

ENDOCARDIUM, the thin layer of 
tissue lining the inside of the heart. 

ENDOCRINE GLANDS, any of the 
ductless glands, such as the adrenals, 
the thyroid, or the pituitary, whose 
secretions pass directly into the blood 
stream. See also glands; hormones. 

ENDOMETRITIS, inflammation of 
the inner lining of the womb. It 
may follow normal birth or may oc¬ 
cur as a result of abortion or infec¬ 
tion. Bad-smelling discharge and 
fever are the two most common 
symptoms. This condition demands 
the attention of a physician. Treat¬ 
ment may require curettage or opera¬ 
tion. 

ENEMA, an injection of liquid into 
the lower bowel through the rectum. 
The purpose may be either to cleanse 
the intestines or to introduce nourish¬ 
ment or drugs into the body. 

An ordinary ear syringe, with a 
rubber tip, may be used to give an 
enema to an infant. A single bulbful 
of liquid is the maximum which may 
be safely introduced into the intes¬ 
tines of a baby at one time. The in¬ 
jection should be performed as slowly 
as possible. 

For enemas of larger quantity, a 
douche bag with a capacity of at 
least a pint may be employed. The 
bag, or can, should be hung not more 
than two feet above the person’s 
head. Placing it higher gives the 
stream excessive force. To this bag 
or can a length of rubber hosing is 
attached. At one end of the hose is 


a nozzle, made of bone or vulcanite, 
or the end of the hose itself, rounded 
off may be introduced into the rec¬ 
tum. A soft nozzle is preferable, since 
it is less likely to injure the fragile 
inner surface of the lower intestine. 

To receive the enema, the person 
may kneel, or he can lie on his left 
side with his knees pulled up to his 
stomach. If he lies in bed, the bed 
should be protected with a rubber 
sheet. Before the nozzle is inserted 
into the rectum the fluid should be 
sent through the entire hose so that 
aU the air is expelled. Petroleum jelly 
or paraffin should be applied to the 
nozzle, which may then be in serted 
for a distance of approximately one 
inch. Unless the liquid is inserted 
slowly, it will immediately emerge. 
If necessary, a folded cloth or towel 
may be held against the rectum to 
aid retention. 

If the purpose of the enema is to 
empty the lower part of the bowels 
rather than to cleanse the intestines, 
the enema may be given with the 
patient sitting up instead of lying 
down, and the liquid, once it has 
entered, may be permitted to emerge 
at once. 

The type of solution used will de¬ 
pend on the purpose of the enema. 
Some enemas are nutritional, and 
others are intended to fill the body 
with fluid. As a laxative, plain water 
may be satisfactory or a mild soap- 
and-water solution, although the lat¬ 
ter type of enema is irritating to some 
people. Baking soda and water, glyc¬ 
erin and salt or soapsuds and salt 
solutions are also used. An enema 
containing a strong medicine should 


324 



ENTERIC FEVER 


EPILEPSY 


not be given except with the specific 
prescription of a physician. A barium 
enema is given before an x-ray or 
fluoroscopic examination of the lower 
intestines and organs of this region 
of the body. See also constipation; 
douche; syringe. 

ENTERIC FEVER, the technical 
term for typhoid and paratyphoid 
fevers. See typhoid fever. 

ENTERITIS, the medical term for 
any acute or chronic inflammation of 
the intestine due to any one of a 
variety of causes. Pain and diarrhea 
are among the symptoms. 

ENURESIS, the scientific name for 
bed wetting, urinary incontinence in 
the absence of demonstrable organic 
causes, at an age when urethral 
sphincter control is normally ex¬ 
pected; a habit disturbance. See also 
BED wetting; child care. 

ENZYME, a complex chemical sub¬ 
stance found largely in the digestive 
juices of the body which acts as a 
catalytic agent on other substances 
and causes them to split up. At least 
a dozen significant digestive enzymes 
are found in the secretions of the 
digestive system and aid in digesting 
fats, proteins, and carbohydrates. See 
also digestion. 

EPHEDRINE, a substance derived 
from a Chinese alkaloid called ma 
huang. When injected or taken into 
the body it causes smooth muscle 
tissue to go into spasm. In hemor¬ 
rhage it constricts blood vessels 
throughout the body, tending to keep 
the blood pressure normal. As an 


ingredient ot nose drops it shrinks 
the lining of the nasal passages per¬ 
mitting more comfortable breathing 
during colds. It is also useful in 
asthma, by relaxing the smooth 
muscle lining of the bronchioles, per¬ 
mitting easier inflow of air into the 
lungs. 

EPIDIDYMITIS, that portion of the 
testicle lying like a hood over the 
upper end. When it becomes infected, 
as in gonorrhea, the condition is 
known as gonorrheal epididymitis. 
The epididymitis may also be associ¬ 
ated with other infections. Treatment 
involves control of the source. The 
sulfa drugs and penicillin are most 
frequently and effectively used for 
these infections, but always on the 
advice of a physician. 

EPIGLOTTIS, an elastic cartilage 
resembling a valve or lid, located be¬ 
hind and below the root of the 
tongue. It covers the glottis, the open¬ 
ing into the windpipe, during swal¬ 
lowing, thus preventing the entrance 
of food and drink into the voice box. 
Formerly it was assumed that the 
epiglottis was drawn down to cover 
the glottis. Actually, however, the 
glottis is drawn upward, to give pro¬ 
tection. 

EPILEPSY, a disorder of the central 
nervous system, perhaps among the 
most misunderstood of all human 
afflictions. Throughout recorded his¬ 
tory, its victims have been, at various 
times, avoided, feared, scorned, ridi¬ 
culed, flogged, and burned at the 
stake. They have been said to, be 
possessed of the devil, and in some 


325 



EPILEPSY 


EPILEPSY 


periods have been revered or even 
worshiped. 

Epileptics are subject to seizures, 
temporary loss or alteration of con¬ 
sciousness, with or without con¬ 
vulsive movements. Five or more 
types of seizures are known, but only 
one, the grand mol, has the charac¬ 
teristics of the popular conception of 
a “fit” or convulsion. Even a violent 
grand mal seizure rarely lasts much 
longer than a minute, though it will 
probably seem much longer to an 
observer. After a seizure, the person 
may sleep for a few hours or resume 
normal activity within a few minutes. 

Contrasted with the grand mal is 
the petit mal seizure, a momentary 
blackout, with or without a twitching 
of the eyelids or of other facial 
muscles. Its manifestations, however, 
are so slight that it may go unnoticed 
even in a crowd. 

Little can be done while a person 
is having a seizure. At the beginning 
of an attack he may be lowered to 
the floor, well away from hard ob¬ 
jects against which he might injure 
himself. Any tight collars or belts 
should be loosened, and a folded 
handkerchief inserted between the 
back teeth to prevent biting of the 
tongue. The patient should be turned 
on his side to permit saliva to flow 
from his mouth. 

Science has made great progress in 
diagnosing and treating epilepsy 
through the use of an instrument, the 
electroencephalograph, which mag¬ 
nifies and records the electric im¬ 
pulses from the brain, much as an 
electrocardiograph checks the heart. 
An electroencephalogram, the written 


record, is unique for each person, 
like a fingerprint. This record is a 
significant clue to the type of medi¬ 
cation most likely to be successful. 

At present, approximately 0.5 per 
cent of the population of the United 
States is afficted with epilepsy. Sei¬ 
zures begin prominently in early 
childhood and in adolescence, but 
many persons are subject to them 
after the age of twenty-one. The 
number of males and females who 
suffer from epilepsy is almost equal. 
The true cause of epilepsy is not as 
yet known. Epilepsy is known to be 
related to damaged brain tissue, or 
to a brain tumor m some cases, but 
it may be present when such con¬ 
ditions do not exist. Tension, al¬ 
though it does not cause seizures, 
may precipitate them. A well-ad¬ 
justed person who is physically and 
mentally active wili have fewer sei¬ 
zures. 

One of the nation’s leading authori¬ 
ties on epilepsy, Dr. WUliam G. 
Lennox, in his book. Science and 
Seizures, compares the electric im¬ 
pulses of the brain of a normal per¬ 
son to a stream with a moderate flow, 
controlled by an adequate dam. In the 
case of a person with epilepsy, the 
level at times rises and spills over 
the dam and a seizure results. The 
level overflows when the predisposi¬ 
tion to epilepsy combines with 
minor body or emotional disturbances 
which most people experience without 
ill effects. 

The hereditary cause of epilepsy is 
more significant than the acquired 
one. Among near relatives of epilep¬ 
tics, the illness is about three times 


326 



EPILEPSY 


EPILEPSY 


more frequent than among the popu¬ 
lation as a whole. Certain disorders 
which may bring about epilepsy are 
thus acquired causes. Among these 
are (1) congenital defects of the 
central nervous system—as, for ex¬ 
ample, degeneration of the nervous 
system, congenital mental defect, and 
scarring of nerve tissue; (2) changes 
in the development of the brain after 
birth—as, for example, various types 
of meningitis, multiple sclerosis, gen¬ 
eral paresis, tumors, hemorrhages, 
cerebral abscess, arteriosclerosis and 
senile degeneration; (3) general dis¬ 
eases such as uremia, toxemia of 
pregnancy, fluid swelling of the brain, 
pernicious anemia, asphyxia, protein 
shock, acute fever in children, hypo¬ 
tension, insulin or electric shock; (4) 
effect of convulsant drugs—^for ex¬ 
ample, camphor, caffeine, ergot, 
epinephrine, cocaine, magnesium sul¬ 
fate, and sulfathiazole. 

According to the Foundation to 
Combat Epilepsy, the incidence of 
epilepsy because of acquired causes is 
variable. The incidence related to 
convulsant drugs and brain tumor is 
not larger than 15 per cent, abnor¬ 
malities at birth around 9 per cent, 
infections about 5 per cent, brain 
tumors about 1.5 per cent, cerebral 
circulatory defects about 1.2 per cent, 
and postnatal brain trauma about 6 
per cent. In approximately 77 per 
cent of the patients, evidence of ante¬ 
cedent organic diseases of the brain 
does not exist. 

A specific cure for epilepsy is not 
known, but medication can reduce 
the frequency of seizures or eliminate 
them completely in about 85 per cent 


of those affected. Many drugs and 
combinations of drugs are effective 
when taken under the guidance of a 
physician. Seizures can be completely 
controlled—that is, prevented from 
occurring—^in about one-half of all 
persons with epilepsy. An additional 
35 per cent under medication have 
the frequency of their seizures re¬ 
duced by half or more, and the re¬ 
maining 15 per cent of epileptic pa¬ 
tients are not helped by medication. 

A person with epilepsy should 
never try to treat himself, since the 
drugs and dosage needed vary from 
person to person and only a phy¬ 
sician, specially trained, is competent 
to prescribe. Mail-order remedies 
should never be used. For most per¬ 
sons with grand mal or psychomotor 
seizures, the doctor employs, among 
other drugs, phenytoin sodium or 
Dilantin; and, if this drug is not fuUy 
effective, phenobarbital may be 
added. Another drug, Mesantoin, 
can be tolerated in larger amounts by 
some patients than others. These 
drugs can be obtained only by pre¬ 
scription and changes and directions 
in dosage must be supervised prop¬ 
erly to be effective. For convulsions, 
the physician may employ first pheno¬ 
barbital or Mebaral. Bromides, al¬ 
though now replaced by newer drugs, 
are still useful in some circumstances. 
In Cases of petit mal, tridione, para- 
dione, Milontin, and phenurone have 
been successfully used in many cases. 

The person subject to epilepsy 
must take his medicines regularly, 
avoid alcohol, emotional upsets, and 
fatigue and live as regular a life as 
possible. He should not be overpro- 

327 



EPINEPHRtNE 


EPISTAXIS 


tected by his family, but should be 
encouraged to lead a full life. Chil¬ 
dren should not be kept out of public 
schools and should play with their 
friends as usual. The epileptic must 
never be put into a position of feeling 
that he is “different.” 

In prevention of epilepsy as regards 
marriage and having children, each 
patient must receive individual con¬ 
sideration. Only the predisposition to 
epilepsy is inherited, not the disease 
itself. The chances that a child of 
epileptic parents wiU have epilepsy 
are about 1 to 40; and that a child 
wiU have more than one convulsion 
during childhood about 1 to 70. If 
an acquired cause is responsible for 
epilepsy in parents, these chances are 
greatly reduced. 

If the number of cases of infectious 
diseases that involve the brain were 
reduced, a great step toward con¬ 
trolling acquired epilepsy would be 
made. Many of these diseases are 
the result of traffic accidents, oc¬ 
cupational accidents, and war in¬ 
juries. Concentrated efforts to reduce 
asphyxia and injuries at birth should 
be made. 

Psychologically the illness may 
have a great effect. Approximately 80 
per cent of all victims of epilepsy 
are capable of leading normal lives; 
those persons about them should rec¬ 
ognize that epilepsy is not com¬ 
municable and not a sign of insanity. 
Unfortunately, through misunder¬ 
standing of the disease, a person with 
epilepsy may find himself shunned by 
other people and discriminated 
against in employment. Concealment 
of the disease may deny many epi¬ 


leptics the advantages of education 
and marriage. Not only must the pub¬ 
lic be educated about epilepsy but 
the epileptic himself must learn to 
have self-confidence and courage. 

Many people vsith epilepsy have 
achieved great heights of accomplish¬ 
ment—for example, Richard Wagner, 
Algernon Swinburne, Vincent van 
Gogh, and Hector Berlioz. A new 
organization, Epilepsy: Self-Help, 
sponsored and financed by the Va¬ 
riety Club Foundation to Combat 
Epilepsy, has been organized for 
people with epilepsy to meet for 
mutual association, understanding, 
and encouragement. The self-con¬ 
fidence of the epileptic can be 
strengthened when he has an op¬ 
portunity to discuss his problems 
with persons who understand them. 
For information about epilepsy, 
write to the National Epilepsy 
League, 130 North Wells Street, 
Chicago, Illinois. 

EPINEPHRINEl, one of the chief 
hormones of the mner portion of the 
adrenal glands. Its trade name is 
Adrenalin. See adiuenalin. 

EPISTAXIS refers to the common 
nosebleed. Nosebleed may be due to 
many factors. In children, it is usu¬ 
ally the result of picking the nose 
and breaking small blood vessels. In 
adults with high-blood pressure, nose¬ 
bleed may occur, which tends to re¬ 
lieve the blood pressure. Nosebleeds 
may result from frequent blowing of 
the nose, from a cold, foreign bodies 
in the nasal passages, or during the 
menstrual period. Fleshy growths in 


328 



EPITHELIOMA 


ERYSIPELAS 


the nose, such as polyps, vitamin de¬ 
ficiency, food allergy, or even leu¬ 
kemia may all produce a nosebleed. 
Chronic nosebleeds can lead to gen¬ 
eral weakness. 

Treatment at home should include 
having the victim lie down, applying 
ice-cold compresses about his lips 
and nose, and inserting small wads 
of cotton into the nasal passages. 
If this does not stop the bleeding, the 
doctor should be called. See also 

NOSE, DISEASES OF. 

EPITHELIOMA, any benign cancer 
or tumor of the skin or other epi¬ 
thelial tissues. See also cancer. 

EPITHELIUM, a tissue composed of 
contiguous cells with little intercellu¬ 
lar substance. It forms the epidermis, 
lines all the hollow organs and pas¬ 
sages of the respiratory, digestive, and 
genitourinary systems of the body. 
The hair, nails, and enamel of the 
teeth are modified epithelial cells. 
EPSOM SALT, a bitter white or 
colorless crystalline salt of mag¬ 
nesium sulphate heptahydrate. It acts 
as a cathartic and also as an antidote 
in lead or carbolic acid poisoning. 

EQUILIBRIUM, physically the sense 
of balance, and mentally a well- 
balanced condition of mind or feel¬ 
ing. Physically it is controlled by 
information from the inner ear and 
elsewhere sent to the brain and trans¬ 
ferred to the necessary muscles. 

If the head is rotated rapidly and 
then suddenly stopped, the fluid in 
the semicirciilar canals of the inner 
ear continues to move. The result 
may be a giddiness so pronounced 


that the person may not be able to 
stand. The same sensation will be 
experienced if pressure is brought on 
the inner ear by means of a syringe, 
or if blood should enter the semi¬ 
circular canals. Likewise the victim 
of locomotor ataxia may possess such 
a faulty sense of balance that he can¬ 
not walk without watching his feet. 

Finally, if the cerebellum is it¬ 
self diseased, the sense of balance is 
destroyed, and the victim may walk 
as if he were suffering from alcoholic 
intoxication. 

ERGOT, a fungus that grows on 
grains and cereals. It is used to aid 
the uterus to contract after child¬ 
birth, to prevent blood loss. It does 
not affect normal pregnancy. Any 
form of this drug must be used only 
under the supervision of a doctor, 
since it may have adverse effects on 
the blood pressure as well as the blood 
vessels themselves. 

ERGOTISM, a disease caused by 
overuse of ergot-containing food or 
drugs; it is characterized by gangrene 
of the fingertips and toes. 

ERYSIPELAS, also known as St. 
Anthony’s fire because the skin be¬ 
comes a bright red as the inflamma¬ 
tion spreads, a skin disease due to 
streptococcal infection. It manifests 
itself in headache, vomiting, chills, 
and fever, pain in the joints and 
prostration. The poison emitted by 
the streptococcus transmits the in¬ 
flammation which spreads rapidly. 
The infection appears on the face, 
but may affect any part of the skin. 
It usually starts in a wound, fissure, 
or min ute abrasion of the skin. 


329 



ERYTHEMA 


ESOPHAGUS 


Erysipelas occurs more often, in 
cold weather when the cracking of 
the skin due to exposure predisposes 
persons to its attack. The condition 
begins as an irregular round or oval 
patch. As it spreads, the patches be¬ 
come livid red, slightly swollen, hot 
and tender. The disease may be fatal, 
particularly to young children or old 
and infir m people, and it is essential 
that a doctor be called at once. 

The development of sulfa com¬ 
pounds and antibiotics in recent years 
has rendered all other forms of treat¬ 
ment of erysipelas obsolete. These 
drugs reduce the fever, check the 
spread of inflammation, and bring the 
condition under control. People with 
erysipelas should be given plenty of 
fluids, at least ten glasses of water a 
day, and nourishing food, since the 
disease devastates the blood and 
weakens the patient. Erysipelas fre¬ 
quently reoccurs and therefore par¬ 
ticular care should be taken to avoid 
scratching or irritating the skin. 

ERYTHEMA, a redness of the skin, 
in uneven patches, caused externally 
by sunlight, ultraviolet rays, x-rays, 
heat, cold, friction, or by chemical 
irritants. Also erythema may result 
from the action of internal poisons, 
as in scarlet fever and other infec¬ 
tious diseases. 

This condition may be caused by 
drugs or by poisons generated in the 
bowels or in other parts of the body. 
Sometimes it is accompanied by 
fever, sore throat, and pain in the 
joints. This type of erythema affects 
young people, especially girls, and 
may last for several weeks. Another 
species may occur as lesions of the 


skin, surrounded with red rings. The 
treatment includes rest in bed, a light 
diet, and the application of a soothing 
powder or lotion. 

In the nodular form of erythema, 
round or oval nodular patches appear 
on the legs below the knees, and on 
the lower arms. The patches are 
tender and discolored, resembling 
bruises. Treatment is somewhat simi¬ 
lar to that for the patchy type of 
ersdhema. Antihistaminic drugs, 
ACTH and several related drugs are 
sometimes effective in controlling 
these cases. 

Another form of erythema, known 
as erythromelalgia, is of nervous 
origin and appears suddenly on the 
hands and feet. A more serious va¬ 
riety of erythema affecting the in¬ 
ternal organs is lupus erythematosus 
in acute form. See also chafing; 
eczema; intertrigo; lupus ery¬ 
thematosus. 

ERYTHROBLASTOSIS FOETALIS. 
When a mother is Rh negative and 
the embryo is Rh positive, antibodies 
are developed before birth which 
may cause the newborn child to suffer 
from jaundice and anemia. This con¬ 
dition is known, medically, as erythro¬ 
blastosis foetalis, which means de¬ 
struction of red cells in the fetus. It 
is also called hemolytic anemia. See 
also BLOOD TYPES. 

ERYTHROCYTES, the scientific 
term for red blood cells. For con¬ 
ditions affecting the red blood cells, 
see also anemia; blood. 

ESOPHAGUS, the tube, also known 
as the gullet, which connects the 
mouth with the stomach. 


330 



ESTROGENS 


EXANTHEM 


The modem physician possesses a 
special instrument by which he can 
actually examine the walls of the 
esophagus, where food will some¬ 
times accumulate and cause irrita¬ 
tion. Occasionally the walls will then 
adhere to each other, or even grow 
together, so that the doctor must 
surgically reopen the organ. 

The two chief symptoms of dis¬ 
eases of the esophagus are pain and 
difficulty in swallowing. The principal 
disorders, besides foreign objects and 
irritation by food, include congenital 
abnormalities, inflammation, ulcers, 
spasm, tumors, rupture, and dilated 
or twisted veins. Cancer may occur 
in the esophagus, usually in the lower 
or middle portions of the tube. 

Psychological problems may also 
be reflected in the esophagus. People 
have starved to death because they 
could not emotionally undertake the 
task of swallowing. However, starva¬ 
tion from this cause is rare, because 
food can be introduced into the body 
by means other than through the 
esophagus. Dilation of and operations 
on the walls of the esophagus are 
performed with a high degree of suc¬ 
cess. See also stomach. 

ESTROGENS, the female sex hor¬ 
mones, are produced primarily in the 
ovaries. However, they also occur in 
the afterbirth, the adrenals and other 
glands. Estrogens are responsible for 
the development of female physical 
characteristics. They cause the breasts 
to enlarge, the deposition of fat 
around the hips, and development of 
the female reproductive glands. They 
make the voice high-pitched, the skin 


soft and delicate, and affea bone 
growth as well. The female sex hor¬ 
mones cause changes inside the uterus 
which lead to menstruation. Exces¬ 
sive levels of female hormone may 
lead to development of fibroid tumors 
of the uterus, to ovarian cysts, bone 
defects and possibly to aggravation 
of tendency to breast cancer or can¬ 
cer in other areas. The female sex 
hormones are used medicinally for 
many conditions—^for instance, to 
help regulate the menstrual periods, 
to lessen the severity of symptoms of 
the mepopause, and to hasten devel¬ 
opment of female characteristics. 
They have been used in men with 
cancer of the prostate, to lessen the 
progress of the disease. They should 
never be employed without the con¬ 
stant supervision of the physician. 
Production of the female sex hor¬ 
mone ceases at the menopause. 

ETBQBR, a thin, colorless, volatile, 
and highly inflammable liquid whose 
chief use is as an anesthetic in opera¬ 
tions and as a solvent. 

EUCALYPTUS OIL, an oil devel¬ 
oped from the leaves of the eucalyp¬ 
tus tree, useful as a stimulant, antisep¬ 
tic, and astringent. 

EUNUCH, a male deprived of his 
testicles. See also castration. 

EUSTACHIAN TUBE, or auditory 
tube, the canal connecting the naso¬ 
pharynx with the middle ear. Its 
function is to equalize the pressure 
between the middle and external ears. 
See also deafness; ear. 

EXANTHEM, any eruption on the 

331 



IN EXERCISE 




r^. 




Exercise — Chart showing the amount of air taken in during various forms of exercise. The 
more strenuous the activity, the greater the intake of air. 


skin. Any acute disease, like measles, 
scarlet fever, or chickenpox, in which 
there is an eruption of the skin is 
called an acute exanthematous dis¬ 
ease. 

EXCRETION, the discharge from 
the body of waste products, including 
feces, sweat, and urine. The greater 
part of this function is performed by 
the kidneys, which are among the 
most significant of the excretory or¬ 
gans. See also bowel; constipation; 
diarbhea; kidneys; urination. 

EXERCBE, the functional activity 


of the muscles. Physical exercise is a 
basic requirement for proper develop¬ 
ment of the body. Failure to exercise 
tends to produce a sluggish digestion, 
flabby muscles, and inadequate elimi¬ 
nation. 

Maximum benefit is derived from 
moderate and regular activity, rather 
than from violent, erratic exercise. A 
strenuous workout over Saturday and 
Sunday, for example, may be ex¬ 
tremely harmful, unless preceded by 
regular training throughout the week. 
This warning applies to mountain 
climbing, sprinting, long-distance run- 









EXHAUSTION 


EXHIBITIONISM 


ning, football, hockey, gymnastics, 
judo, wrestling, and boxing. Further¬ 
more, all excessively vigorous games 
should be avoided after the age of 
thirty. 

Safer exertions include walking, 
which is especially valuable because 
the distance and speed as well as the 
choice between level and hilly areas 
can be determined with relation to 
the physical condition of the walker. 
Golf and gardening can also be pur¬ 
sued at an individual pace. Swim¬ 
ming encourages deep breathing, rid¬ 
ing develops a sense of balance, and 
dancing has a special asset because 
the sense of music and rhythm is in¬ 
volved. The value of dancing will be 
enhanced if overindulgence, late 
hours, and lack of sleep are avoided. 

Calisthenics include such well- 
known exercises as the pushup and 
the kneebend. Activities of this type 
may be varied by the use of dumb¬ 
bells, Indian clubs, and jumping 
ropes. Large muscles do not con¬ 
tribute to general health. 

Exercises for the correction of spe¬ 
cial disorders are termed remedial. 
These may be active, if the patient 
exerts the effort, or passive, if the 
work is performed by someone else. 
A special type of passive remedial 
exercise is that in which a hand, arm, 
leg, or foot, or even the whole body 
is placed in a moving machine. Such 
exercise is helpful in the treatment of 
stiff jomts. See also physical 
THERAPY. 

EXHAUSTION, a condition pro¬ 
duced by loss of vital power from 
fatigue or protracted disease. Ex¬ 


treme exhaustion is known as nervous 
prostration or psychasthenia, some¬ 
times referred to as neurocirculatory 
asthenia or weakness. The symptoms 
of exhaustion often include insomnia, 
loss of memory and appetite, listless- 
ness, palpitations of the heart, and 
vitamin deficiency. Psychasthenia is , 
rarely fatal, but it may render the 
person useless to himself, his family, 
and society. Corrective measures re¬ 
quire a thorough examination, both 
mental and physical, of the persoiL 
Ordinarily a complete rest is impera¬ 
tive and possibly a radical revision of 
diet or even a change of occupation. 
See also asthenia; fatigue; heat 

SICKNESS. 

EXHIBniONISM, a variety of 
sexual disturbance, seen most fre¬ 
quently in men, in which there is a 
compulsion to display the sexual 
organs, usually without desire for 
sexual union. Organized nudism is 
a different form of sexual disorder. 
The exhibitionist is typically an im¬ 
mature person, usually beset by feel¬ 
ings of inadequacy. Often he is con¬ 
scientious in his daily work, and ffie 
tendency is not suspected by friends. 
Exhibitionists act from an uncontrol¬ 
lable inner tension and afterward ex¬ 
perience depression and intense re¬ 
morse. Psychiatrists believe that the 
disorder is the result of a subdued in¬ 
tense rage of some sort, a feeling of 
arrogance or hatred toward women 
and a desire to shock. Inner feelings 
of cruelty and sadism exist as well. 
The exhibitionist usually does not 
desire to inflict any physical harm. 
Treatment demands intensive psy- 


333 



EXOPHTHALMIC GOITER 


EYE 


chiatric study; seldom can the person 
cure himself. 

EXOPHTHALMIC GOITER, also 
known as Graves’ disease, a disease 
caused chiefly by overproduction 
of the thyroid hormone with con¬ 
sequent enlarging of the thyroid 
gland. It is characterized by goiter, 
rapid heart action, protruding eye¬ 
balls, nervous excitability, fine in¬ 
voluntary tremor, loss of weight, mus¬ 
cular weakness, and a tendency to 
intense, acute exacerbations called 
thyroid crises. See also glands; 
GOITER. 

EXOPHTHALMOS, bulging or for¬ 
ward displacement of the eyes. Usu¬ 
ally it is caused by an increase of 
pressure within the eye or by changes 
in the muscles of the eye. This condi¬ 
tion is seen most often in cases of 
exophthalmic goiter. 

EXPECTORATION, ejection of ma¬ 
terial from the mouth by coughing 
or spitting. Fluid or semifluid matter 
may be expelled from the lungs or 
air passages, or merely saliva. The 
matter expectorated, called sputum, 
may contain disease microbes, and 
spitting on floors and streets and pub¬ 
lic places is not only imattractive but 
also unhealthful. Expectoration 
should be done into a handkerchief, 
or in places where it cannot do harm. 

EYE, the organ of sight. Constructed 
like a camera, the eye is intricate and 
efficient. All living species ordinarily 
have two eyes. The eyes of many 
other species surpass the human eye 
in certain respects. Many insects, for 
example, and some animals have eyes 

334 


which are far more acute and efficient 
than those of human beings. 

Structure and mechanism of vision. 
The eye is nearly a perfect sphere and 
occupies the anterior part of the fron¬ 
tal cavity of the skull. It is made of 
three concentric layers: the cornea, 
the iris, and the retina. The cornea is 
transparent and fits into a white mem¬ 
brane called the sclerotic coat. The 
iris connects with the choroid layer 
by means of the ciliary body. The 
iris itself is a colored, circular mem¬ 
brane with a central perforation, the 
pupil. The retina, the innermost of 
the three layers, is a delicate trans¬ 
parent membrane containing the ends 
of the optic nerve. The vitreous body, 
a firm transparent jelly, constitutes 
about four-fifths of the eyeball. In 
front of the vitreous body is the 
crystalline lens, slightly yellow, disc¬ 
like in shape, transparent, and curv¬ 
ing out on each side. The space be¬ 
tween the lens and cornea is divided 
by the iris into two parts, the anterior 
and posterior chambers, which con¬ 
tain the aqueous humor, a transpar¬ 
ent fluid. In front the eye is covered 
by the conjunctiva, a mucous mem¬ 
brane, and posteriorly by a fibrous 
capsule. The entire eyeball is moved 
by a group of muscles attached on 
the outer surface. The curvature of 
the lens is changed by the ciliary mus¬ 
cle, while the pupil is dilated by the 
action of the dilator and constrictor 
fibers in the iris. 

To understand the mechanism of 
vision, some knowledge of the con¬ 
struction of the eye, as has been out¬ 
lined above, is helpful. Actually we 
do not see with the eye but with the 



EYE 


EYE 


brain and nervous system. The chief 
factors involved in seeing are the op¬ 
tic nerve and the brain’s center for 
vision. The retinaj part of the nervous 
system, serves to convey images to 
the optic nerve. The lens is actually 
a lens, and serves to focus objects on 
the retina, while the muscles control 



Eye — A secfionaf diagram of the eyeball, 
the organ of vision. The eyeball is held in 
its socket by strong muscles. The cornea is 
the transparent externol layer which protects 
the eye. If a portion of the cornea is defec* 
tive and loss of sight is threatened, it is 
possible to remove the diseased area and 
transplant a piece of healthy cornea from 
another person's eye. Corneal transplanta¬ 
tion does not restore sight in every case, 
despite the modern techniques developed, 
because other parts of the eye as well as 
the cornea may be unhealthy. The lens which 
focuses the picture is held in place by the 
suspensory ligament. The retina receives the 
picture and the optic nerve transmits it to 
the brain. The iris controls the amount of 
light entering the eye. It is like a colored 
curtain with a hole, the pupil. When looking 
directly at the eye, the iris appears dough¬ 
nut-shaped, and the color may be brown, 
blue or green, depending on hereditary 
factors In strong or bright light, the pupil 
in the iris becomes smaller; in dim light the 
pupil becomes larger. The vitreous humor is 
a clear, feiiy-iike substance which fills the 
large space behind the lens. 


the size aed shape of the lees m its 
focusing. Accessory muscles move the 
eyeball. The iris controls the amount 
of light which enters the eye by dilat¬ 
ing and contractmg. 

Ideally the lens of the eye receives 
light from the outside and bends it 
so that the image is focused on a 
small point of the retina. To main¬ 
tain focus on the retina, the lens 
must change its shape when objects 
are viewed from different distances. 
This is called accommodation. When 
the eye is unable to accommodate 
properly, nearsightedness or far¬ 
sightedness may result. 

Nearsightedness, myopia, is the 
condition in which one is unable to 
see objects clearly at a distance. It 
may be hereditary and frequently is 
not discovered for some time. 

Farsightedness, hypermetropia, is 
the condition in which one sees things 
at a distance better than things close 
up because the light is focused at a 
point beyond the retina. 

The eye in its normal functioning 
has the ability to adapt itself to vari¬ 
ous conditions of light* Overuse will 
exhaust this ability, and proper light¬ 
ing is necessary to prevent the eye 
from becoming strained or fatigued. 

A newborn baby is farsighted and 
for that reason pays little attention to 
objects close to Mm. By two months, 
he is able to use Ms eye muscles to 
bring his eyes into range for what he 
wishes to see. The baby does not see 
small objects clearly until he is at 
least six months old. 

As people grow older, their eyes 
change. The most significant changes 
are those in wMch the lens become 


335 



EYE 


EYE 


clouded, resulting in cataract. The 
muscles connected with change of 
shape of the lens to accommodate 
seeing at various distances do not re¬ 
spond as well as formerly. People 
past forty may require glasses when 
previously they had not needed them. 
Moreover, all the tissues concerned 



C 


gye — While the eye Is one of the most per¬ 
fect instruments known, it is subject to 
optical illusions. Figures A, A\ and A" are 
of exactly the same size but appear to be 
of different sizes because the horizontal 
and vertical fines give a wrong impression. 
The lines shown in B, B', and B'' ore of ex¬ 
actly the same length, but again the rulings 
produce an optical illusion. The lines shown 
in C are exactly parallel, but the lines make 
them seem to diverge at the center. 


with the nutrition of the eye change 
as age increases, and the eye be¬ 
comes functionally a less competent 
organ. 

Except for time spent in sleeping, 
the eye is used almost constantly from 
the moment of birth until death. 
Overwork of the eyes results in ear¬ 
lier exhaustion, just as with any other 
organ. Therefore, vision should be 
facilitated in every possible way. The 
eye needs regular rest periods. To re¬ 
duce strain, it is essential that suitable 
working conditions be given the eye. 

The eye may be used for measuring 
the general state of health. Con¬ 
versely the body may reflect trouble 
with the eyes. If the doctor finds the 
eyes clear and bright he will feel less 
concern about any immediate danger 
to general health. When a severe 
cold, fever or weakness from any 
cause is present, the eye will reflect 
this condition by lack of luster, heavy 
eyelids, and sluggish movement. In 
jaundice, the white of the eye be¬ 
comes yellowish. 

The eye may also reflect general 
disturbances of the body, such as 
hardening of the arteries, anemia. 



Ey® — The eye is like a camera. Here ore shown o camera wUh iu main portions and the 

portions of the eye that correspond. 








EYE 


and diseases of the kidney and nerv¬ 
ous system. A tumor in the brain is 
sometimes discovered because of diffi¬ 
culty with eyesight. Frequently dou¬ 
ble vision^ diplopia, is the fibrst symp¬ 
tom of inflammation of the brain. 
The pupils of the eye may be con¬ 
stantly contracted, dilated, or even 
unequal in size because of the effects 
of drugs on the body. 

The dominant eye. Each eye has 
an image, and these images are fused 
by a higher center in the brain. Eyes 
may differ, one from the other. When 
a person sees everything with one eye 
and depends on the image from one 
eye only, he is called a monocular. 
If he sees with both eyes and the 
images are properly fused, he has 
binocular vision. A person may be 
right-eyed or left-eyed, just as he may 
be right-handed or left-handed, and 
the eye on which he depends is called 
the dominant eye. When anything 
happens to the dominant eye, the 
other must then function. Little diffi¬ 
culty is encountered if the eye that 
has not been dominant previously 
worked satisfactorily. However, if 
that eye cannot assume dominance, a 
variety of symptoms may result, such 
as stuttering, fatigue, or various types 
of hysterical attacks in addition to 
symptoms related to vision. 

Color blindness. Color blindness is 
more common among men than 
among women. Difficulty in dis¬ 
tinguishing between red and green 


Eye- Here are shown the differences be¬ 
tween eyes that are norma! and those that 
are either nearsighted or farsighted^ to¬ 
gether with diagrams indicating how vision 
IS corrected by suitably curved lenses. 


t: 



NDBMAZ EVE. 
with Qorrectly matched lens anditnuidecC^ehall. 




c 



Another type of X 
J^EAMSIGHTEDETE, 
causecC bp the IPns of the eye being too tMcJ^ 
anoC too greatlp curoecC 





EYE 


EYE 


is the most common form of color 
blindness. The blue-yellow dilemma 
is much rarer. Color-blind persons 
see objects as lighter or darker, but 
are unable to distinguish the shades. 
Sometimes they may distinguish be¬ 
tween red and green lights on road¬ 
ways by their difference in bright¬ 
ness. 

Everyone who drives a car or 
works in an occupation in which 
color detection is significant should 
have a test to determine whether or 
not he is color blind. A test for color 
blindness may consist of sorting and 
matching color samples. Traffic sig¬ 
nals are most frequently red, green, 
and yellow and occasionally blue, 


colors most frequently concerned in 
color blindness. Therefore, a color¬ 
blind person should not drive a car 

in traffic. 

A specific cure for color blindness 
is not feasible, since the defect is 
one of structure of the eye. However, 
color vision may be developed or sub¬ 
stitutions found. 

In certain branches of the armed 
services, like the navy and air force, 
color blindness is a bar to admission. 

Vision of the child. When a child 
reaches one year of age, parents can, 
with a simple test, determine whether 
or not his vision is perfect. A band¬ 
age may be tied over one eye. Then 
a block, a ball, or any toy that the 



E)re Eyesight can often be preserved if proper lighting is used at all times. Inadequate 
light places strain on the eyes and makes work much more difficult. 


338 


Astigmatism — Here is the effect produced by astigmatism. In this cose, horizontal lines 
are sharp but vertical fines are unsharp. 


child uses may be placed near him* 
If the vision of the child is normal, 
he will pick up the object when 
either eye is bandaged, indicating 
that each eye functions properly by 
itself. If, however, the child is slow 
to detect the toy or unable to recog¬ 
nize it, an eye specialist should be 
consulted. 

The next significant time for test¬ 
ing vision is when the child begins to 
read. Dfficulties of vision may be 
present if the child holds the book 
too close to his eyes, too far away, 
or at an unusual angle. Such pe¬ 
culiarities call for immediate testing 
of the child’s vision. 

Certain other elementary symp¬ 
toms are quickly apparent. A child 


with a pronounced degree of astig¬ 
matism may frown as he reads; he 
may have an aversion to reading be¬ 
cause he associates it with headaches 
and discomfort. Sometimes one eye 
alone may be farsighted and the child 
win be able to get along by using 
just the good eye. 

Unfortunately the cMld who is 
nearsighted has few readily detected 
symptoms. He sees things that are 
close and is not concerned about ob¬ 
jects at a distance. The difficulty may 
first become apparent when the child 
plays a game, such as baseball or 
basketball, or is taken to a motion 
picture. 

Cross-eyes, Any straining of the 
eye or imbalance of the muscles may 

339 





EYE 


EYE 


result in cross-eyes or squint. Chil¬ 
dren may be bom with one or both 
eyes crossed. A squint or walleye may 
develop from excessive strains placed 
on the external muscle of the eye 
by the extra effort which is required 
to see when there is an extreme de¬ 
gree of nearsightedness. 

Children rarely outgrow cross-eyes. 
The-sight of the crossed eye may 
never develop and, in many instances, 
the squint or crossed eye becomes 
worse. Early diagnosis and treatment 
are essential for the best results. As 
soon as one notices that a child is 
cross-eyed, an eye specialist should 
be consulted. Frequently good results 
are obtained merely with proper eye¬ 
glasses, which tend to hold the two 
eyes in position. Children have been 
found able to tolerate eyeglasses at 
the age of fifteen months. The earlier 
glasses are used, the more effective 
they will be. 

The weak eye may be exercised by 
various training devices to correct the 
habit of suppressing the image of 
one eye. In certain disorders, when 
the deficiency is slight, this orthoptic 
training is successful. The most favor¬ 
able age for such therapy is between 
three and six years. After the age of 
seven the results are rarely satis¬ 
factory. 

The surgical procedure for over¬ 
coming cross-eyes is the most certain 
method of correction. Proper place¬ 
ment of the eye muscles by the sur¬ 
geon tends to bring the eye back into 
proper relationship to the other eye 
and permit binocular vision. The op¬ 
eration is not a guarantee that vision 
will be improved, but it will prevent 

340 


the vision from being eventually lost 
from failure to use the eye success¬ 
fully. In addition, the correction of 
cross-eyes is essential in establishing 
a proper mental attitude in the child. 
Children with cross-eyes may be so 
sensitive to ridicule that they become 
shy, withdrawn, introverted person¬ 
alities and their lives ruined as a 
consequence. 

Color of the eyes. The color of the 
eyes is apparently largely governed 
by heredity. Eye color is a character¬ 
istic that comes down to people from 
their ancestors. When a blue-eyed 
person marries a brown-eyed person 
and there are four children, one 
probably wfil have blue eyes, one 
brown eyes, and two may have blue 
eyes with traces of brown. Brown¬ 
eyed parents may produce not only 
children with brown eyes but also 
blue-eyed children. The color of the 
eye is helpful in determining pater¬ 
nity but is hardly conclusive. 

Colored rings. When one looks at 
bright light at night—for example, 
street lamps—they may seem to be 
surrounded by areas of color or col¬ 
ored rings, blue on the inside and red 
on the outside. This is not a dis¬ 
turbance of the eye, for these colors 
are due to the tissues and cornea of 
the eye. The tissues are not seen in 
ordinary light. 

Specks before the eyes; muscae 
volantes. Because of the structure of 
the eyes, several disturbances of vi¬ 
sion may develop which are not ac¬ 
tual defects but merely tricks of eye 
function. If a person suddenly looks 
up at the sky or at a white ceiling 
after the eyes have been closed, he 



EYE 


EYE 


will probably notice a number of 
minute specks that move in front of 
the eyes. These specks are blood cor¬ 
puscles moving in the smallest blood 
vessels at the back of the eyes. If 
the heart beats faster because of 
exercise, the blood corpuscles will 
move faster and the specks will also 
seem to move faster. 

Eyestrain. Eyestrain is common. 
Unsuspected eyestrain may be asso¬ 
ciated with twitching of the eyelids 
and face. Nausea and vomiting may 
appear, with headache, loss of appe¬ 
tite, and many other similar condi¬ 
tions. The only conclusive way to 
determine whether or not eyestrain 
actually exists is to test the ability 
of the eyes to see, and then to over¬ 
come the condition by rest or with 
eyeglasses. 

Glare or bright light places stress 
on the eyes. Special care should be 
taken to insure proper lighting in 
the home, schools, offices, and fac¬ 
tories. Although motion pictures and 
television may provoke eyestrain and 
fatigue, under normal conditions 
they do not cause serious eyestrain. 
However, the wrong type of lighting 
in the theater or home, films that are 
jerky, spotted, or badly lighted, and 
long periods of viewing may produce 
an uncomfortable condition. 

Conjunctivitis, The tissue which 
lines the eyelids and runs out over the 
eyebaU is called the conjunctiva. In¬ 
flammation of this tissue is known 
as conjunctivitis or pinkeye. Its symp¬ 
toms are smarting and burning of the 
eyelids, formation of pus, and red¬ 
dened eyelids. The inflamed eye be¬ 
comes exceedingly sensitive to light. 


and tears flood it constantly. After 
sleep, the eyelids may be crasted to¬ 
gether. This ordinary disorder of the 
eye demands care by a qualified doc¬ 
tor. Treatment is based on the sever¬ 
ity of the infection and the character 
of the particular germ involved. 

Styes. Styes involve infection of 
the glands of the eyelid by one of 
the common pus-forming germs, usu¬ 
ally near a hair follicle, and often 
appear in crops. In some instances 
they are associated with uncorrected 
errors of vision. Under such circum¬ 
stances the eye does not resist in¬ 
vasion by outside organisms as well 
as the normally functioning eye. 

A sty behaves like a pimple or 
small boil. After a day or two it 
softens and bursts, the infectious ma¬ 
terial is discharged, and recovery 
usually follows. Before the sty has 
softened, its progress can sometimes 
be stopped by pulling out the hair 
that runs through it, and by treating 
the spot with an antiseptic that is 
not dangerous to the eye itself. Usu¬ 
ally it is helpful to apply hot com¬ 
presses to styes, to hasten the devel¬ 
opment of the inflammation. When 
a yellow spot appears, the infectious 
material should be released at once. 

In the case of repeated formation 
of styes, physicians collect the germs 
causing them, make a vaccine from 
them, and reinject this vaccine into 
the patient. This may help the patient 
to develop specific resistance against 
the germs responsible for the styes. 

Glaucoma. Glaucoma causes 15 
per cent of aU blindness in the United 
States, and about one-half of the 

341 



EYE 


EYE 


blindness in adults. In this condition, 
pressure within the eyeball brings 
about loss of sight. Interference oc¬ 
curs with the circulation of the fluid 
that comes into the eye. The accumu¬ 
lation of this fluid causes pressure, 
and as the pressure increases there 
is pain, the eye becomes hard and 
reddened and the pupil gray and 
cloudy. This describes the acute form 
of glaucoma. 

In a second and more serious form 
of glaucoma, gradual obstruction of 
the drainage system occurs so that 
the pressure increases slowly and the 
loss of sight is gradual. 

The physician can determine the 
extent and effect of the pressure with 
the ophthalmoscope and the tonome¬ 
ter. Drugs have been developed which 
eliminate fluid and lower pressure 
within the eye. 

As the glaucoma develops, the per¬ 
son finds that he can see straight 
ahead as well as he ever could, but 
not so well to the sides. Gradually 
the vision in front also becomes nar¬ 
rowed until finally there is complete 
loss of sight. 

In the treatment of early glaucoma, 
drugs, such as Diamox, alone may be 
sufficient. In later stages, drugs pre¬ 
pare the tissues of the eye so that an 
operation to relieve the pressure, 
known as an iridectomy because part 
of the iris is cut out, may be more 
easily and successfully performed. 

An instrument useful in measuring 
the width of the field of vision is the 
perimeter. If the field is steadily 
narrowing, glaucoma is present. A 
correct diagnosis early in the devel¬ 
opment of glaucoma is invaluable 


in preventing pain and pressure and 
in saving sight. 

Older women should be particu¬ 
larly watchful of their eyes, as they 
are more likely to suffer from glau¬ 
coma than men. 

Excitement is often a factor in pro¬ 
ducing glaucoma, because of the in¬ 
creased flow of blood to the eyes 
during excitement, with consequent 
rise m pressure. Early symptoms may 
include headache, blurred vision, eye 
pain, and nausea. Prompt attention 
should be paid and an eye doctor 
consulted. 

Tumors. Tumors may arise in the 
lids, the eye socket, or within the 
eyeball, and may interfere with vision 
and cause irritation of the eyeball. 
They should be removed, even though 
they are generally benign tumors. 
Malignant tumors sometimes occur, 
which can spread and may require re¬ 
moval of the eye. The most common 
malignant tumor of the eye, retino¬ 
blastoma, is confined to children un¬ 
der ten years of age, and may even 
occur at birth. Malignant melanoma, 
perhaps the most fatal and most 
prevalent form of eye tumor, occurs 
most commonly in adults, arising in¬ 
side the eye and spreading throughout 
the body if not checked in time and 
removed. 

Fatigue. An eye which is fatigued 
and unable to work satisfactorily be¬ 
comes easily irritated. Moreover, it 
is more apt to be invaded by foreign 
bodies, like cinders and dust, simply 
because the tissues do not react to 
rid the eye of such foreign material. 
Persons with bad eyesight frequently 


342 



lye - {A) The myopic eye sees near objects sharp and distant objects unsharp. (B| The 
hyperopic eye has sharp distant vision but unsharp near vision. (Q The anastlgmafk eye 
sees lines in different directions with varying degrees of sharpness. In this photograph, the 
vertical lines are sharper than the horizontal. (D) The presbyopic eye like the hyperopic, 
results in unsharp near vision, although distant vision may be satisfactorily sharp. However, 
the cause is entirely different from that of hyperopia. Presbyopia is caused by the loss of the 
accommodative function of the lens; it loses its elasticity so that if can no longer focus near 
and sharp with equal ease. Practically everyone becomes presbyopic in middle life. 


343 









EYE 


EYE 


ha\e red nms on the ejes, swoUen 
ejelids and constant watering, and 
the eyelids may be crusted together 
m the morning. The appearance of 
any of these signs should be an indi¬ 
cation that the eye needs medical 
care. 

Guarding eyesight. Here are a few 
simple rules helpful in guarding eye¬ 
sight. 

1. Do not face bright windows or 
bright light when at work. 

2. Never cleanse the eyes with a 
towel used by others. 

3. Do not place hooks, doorstops, 
or other projections at the level of 
children’s eyes. If such objects are 
placed near the floor or above chil¬ 
dren’s eye level, there are less likely 
to be serious accidents involving a 
child’s eyes. 

Prevention of eye injuries in indus¬ 
try. Blindness or impairment of vi¬ 
sion is one of the most serious and 
costly of all nonfatal accidents which 
workers may suffer. 

Some eye disorders are known to 
be definitely associated with processes 
involving intense light and heat. For 
instance, a cataract occurs in the 
eyes of glass workers, who are ex¬ 
posed to the heat and glare of a 
furnace for many hours each week. 
All sorts of devices have been devel¬ 
oped to prevent exposure of eyes of 
glass workers to this and other haz¬ 
ards. Fortunately the introduction of 
machinery for making glass bottles 
and other machinery to take the 
place of hand operations has mini¬ 
mized the dangers of furnace glare. 
Workers in other industries, like 
steel making, who are regularly ex¬ 

344 


posed to glare from furnaces should 
wear appropriate glasses to shut out 
the light. 

Workers in electric arc welding 
sometimes have inflammation of the 
eyes, with pain and headache. Similar 
symptoms affect workers in studios 
where photography, such as motion 
picture and television photography, 
is the chief occupation. Here again, 
careful attention to prevention of 
overlong exposure to powerful lights 
is imperative to overcome the hazard. 

Certain industrial poisons are dan¬ 
gerous to the eyes, including am¬ 
monia, phosphorus, derivatives of 
lead, benzene, and methyl alcohol. 
At least fifty known poisons that can 
affect the eyes are used in industrial 
processes. Inhalation of poisonous 
dust or vapor and direct action of the 
poison on workers who have not 
thoroughly cleansed their hands is 
possible. 

Adequate provision for frequent 
washing of hands by workers, and the 
use of exhaust fans for getting rid 
of dusts and gases are the best means 
of eliminating industrial eye hazards. 
The prevention of accidents to the 
eyes involves protection against flying 
fragments of metal, stone, and grit, 
and against bums from acids or 
strong caustics. 

Properly made goggles, helmets, 
and shields are part of the safety 
program of weU-managed plants. 

Safety rules in eye injuries. 

1. Under no circumstances should 
an untrained or inexperienced person 
attempt to remove any foreign body 
from the eye. 



EYE BANK 


EYE BANK 


2. Immediately after an accident, 
the eye may be bathed with suitable 
mild aseptic or sterilized solutions, 
preferably a weak solution of boric 
acid made with sterilized water. 

3. The eye should be covered with 
a sterile bandage moistened with this 
solution. 

4. The person whose eye is in¬ 
volved should be sent immediately 
to a physician in charge of such 
cases. 

Removing foreign bodies. Hun¬ 
dreds of superstitions suggest how 
best to remove foreign bodies from 
the surface of the eye. They concern 
sneezing or rubbing the other eye or 
similar notions. It is actually much 
safer to rub the other eye than the 
one in which the foreign body has 
lodged. Usually rubbing pushes the 
foreign substance farther into the 
eye. 

Those persons who understand 
how to remove foreign bodies, make 
certain that their own hands are 
clean and that every instrument or 
other material used is clean or steri¬ 
lized. The eye itself must be handled 
with the utmost delicacy. The person 
examining the eye carefully studies 
the eye, while the affected person first 
looks upward, so that the lower lid 
may be pulled down; then down¬ 
ward, while the upper lid is turned 
back. The upper lid cannot be turned 
back safely while the person is look¬ 
ing up or moving the eyeball con¬ 
stantly. With practice, skill can be 
developed in turning back the upper 
lid. 

If the foreign substance is not 
seen, the examiner then looks at 


the surface of the eyeball, changing 
the light so as to catch the reflection 
of any foreign substance which may 
be imbedded in the cornea. Infinite 
care must be taken to prevent in¬ 
fection, as secondary infections may 
incite ulcers which may destroy the 
sight of the eye. 

Viewing Television. 

1. Make sure that you are getting 
clear reception. 

2. Adjust tone setting before tun¬ 
ing the picture to desired brilliance. 
An unsteady image or too much light 
will produce visual discomfort. 

3. Avoid intense darkness or bright 
light in the room in which television 
is viewed. Mild, indirect light is 
preferable. 

4. Sunglasses should not be worn 
for viewing because they adapt vision 
to unnatural conditions. 

5. Avoid excessively long periods 
of concentration on television. 

6. Find the most comfortable 
distance for your own eyes. 

7. In case of discomfort, have 
your vision examined. Many older 
persons who wear bifocal glasses 
may find neither segment suited to 
television viewing. 

See also cataract; cornea; 
CORNEAL transplantation; SQUINT. 

EYE BANE, a repository in which 
an ophthalmic surgeon may secure 
a cornea, to be used in an eye-graft¬ 
ing operation. The eye bank, in turn, 
secures its materials from a variety 
of sources, such as the eyes of a stiU- 
bom infant or on the death of an 


345 



EYE GLASSES 


EYE GLASSES 


older person. Many persons now will 
their eyes for such transplantations. 
To operate such a bank is not only 
expensive but demands that the mem¬ 
bers of the staff possess extraordinary 
technical skill. However, the results 
are frequently so good as to justify 
all costs. See also cornea; corneal 
transplantation; eye. 

EYE GLASSES, lenses used to cor¬ 
rect and aid inadequate vision. They 
may supplement the diminishing ca¬ 
pacity of the eye to adapt itself to 
distance, adjust the diflSculty caused 
by the pull of various eye muscles, or 


aid in correcting poor vision caused 
by faulty anatomy of the eye. 

Anomalies in anatomy are respon¬ 
sible for astigmatism, in which the 
image fails to focus properly on 
the retina, the part of the eye which 
receives the image. A person is far¬ 
sighted when the rays of light focus 
behind the retina, a condition usually 
corrected by a convex lens. If the 
person is nearsighted, so that the 
focus occurs in front of the retina, 
the adjustment can be made with a 
concave lens. See also astigmatism; 
bifocal; contact lenses; eye; 
myopia; presbyopia. 


346 



FACE, the front part of the head, 
including the eyes, cheeks, chin, fore¬ 
head, nose, and mouth. The facial 
skin, although not thick, contains 
numerous blood vessels and glands 
for the passage of oil, sweat, and 
other secretions. The tissue imder- 
neath the skin is thickened only in 
the vicinity of the chin; elsewhere it 
tends to be rather loose. Because of 
this looseness, space is available for 
swelling. 

Many facial muscles, some near 
the surface, others far beneath, are 
used in facial expressions. These 
muscles coordinate with muscles in 
the forehead. In the act of eating, a 
muscle in the cheek poises the food 
between the teeth while it is being 
chewed and prevents food from 
gathering between the teeth and on 
the inside surface of the cheek. One 
of the principal nerves, the seventh 
or facial nerve, controls these mus¬ 
cles. 

The main artery of the face moves 


upward and then forward. One of its 
branches is directed toward the tonsil 
and two other branches to the upper 
and lower lips respectively. Since 
these branch arteries to the lips are 
joined by two parallel arteries from 
the other side of the face, bleeding of 
the lip is difficult to control except 
by compressing the mouth at both 
ends. 

The facial vein, which sometimes 
runs parallel with the facial artery, is 
connected with the cavernous sinus 
located inside the skull. Because of 
this connection, any serious infection 
of the face can transmit its poison to 
the veins in the skuU. A facial in¬ 
fection should always be taken care 
of by a physician. 

Complexion refers to the color and 
texture of the facial skin. Many ail¬ 
ments and conditions can affect the 
complexion. In chloasma, commonly 
known as liver spots, brown patches 
appear on the skin. It is often, though 
not necessarily, associated with preg- 



FAINTING 


FALLOPIAN TUBES 


nancy. Similar patches may occur 
which are not chloasma. Facial 
ruddiness has a variety of sources. K 
permanent it may be a birthmark. It 
may be associated with fever or with 
the hot flashes which sometimes ac¬ 
company menopause. Redness in the 
vicinity of the nose often accom¬ 
panies a type of acne, acne rosacea, 
which is produced by digestive ail¬ 
ments. In alcoholics, the nose may 
be red and the network of blood 
vessels chronically swollen. Prolonged 
exposure to weather can cause the 
skin to take on a red appearance. A 
bluish tinge to the facial skin may 
result from persistent bronchitis or 
asthma or cyanosis, a heart disease. 
Anemia may cause the complexion to 
be pallid. Any of these color tones 
to the complexion may be perfectly 
normal. In a healthy person, the gums 
and inside of the lower eyelid are 
a rosy color and, as with the skin, a 
deviation from this may indicate the 
presence of some undesirable con¬ 
dition. The appearance of the com¬ 
plexion may also be affected by such 
afflictions as acne, eczema, or impe¬ 
tigo. 

A large amount of fat is packed 
under the facial skin. When this 
tends to diminish, as in old age or 
sickness, the skin becomes less elastic 
and begins to show wrinkles. See also 
ACNE rosacea; chloasma; cos¬ 
metics. 

FAINTING, may be defined as a 
temporary suspension of conscious¬ 
ness. Originally a depression occurs 
in the action of the heart. This can be 
caused by something environmental, 


such as cold, heat, or hunger, or by 
mental shock, perhaps from pain or 
fright. As a consequence, the flow of 
blood to the brain is interrupted. 
Dizziness, difficulty in vision, a ring¬ 
ing in the ears, pallor, and an un¬ 
steady appearance may follow. The 
climax is a falling or sinking to the 
ground, possibly with a long sigh. 
Momentarily the victim may hardly 
seem alive. The breathing and pulse 
beat, for example, are sometimes al¬ 
most imperceptible. 

Treatment must encourage the 
flow of blood to the brain. This 
means that the patient’s head should 
go down between his knees, or his 
entire body placed in the prone 
position. It is equally important that 
the victim should have plenty of air; 
the coolest place, especially in a 
hot and crowded room, is undoubt¬ 
edly near the floor. Clothes should 
also be loosened, particularly those 
which are wound around the neck or 
across the chest. Alcoholic beverages, 
ether, ammonia, or smelling salts are 
often administered. Under intelligent 
treatment the patient will soon begin 
to breathe again in a normal fashion. 
At the same time color will come 
back into his face and his eyes will 
open. See also dizziness; first aid. 

FALLEN ARCHES. See arches, 

FALLEN. 

FALLOPIAN TUBES, the two tubes 
lying close to each of the two ovaries 
and leading into the womb or uterus. 
Their function is to transport the egg 
cell or ovum, liberated each month 
by one of the ovaries, into the womb. 

The potency of the Fallopian tubes 


348 



FALLOUT PiOTECTION 


FALLOUT PROTECTION 


is essential to pregnancy. They may, 
however^ like other tissues, become 
affected by various disorders which 
interfere with their normal function. 
Painful twisting and blocking, for 
instance, may occur and be followed 
by secondary infection. 

Sometimes a fertilized egg ceil will 
begin to develop abnormally in one 
of the Fallopian tubes rather than 
in the womb. The condition, tubal or 
ectopic pregnancy, demands prompt 
surgery since unchecked growth of 
the developing embryo within the 
tube will rupture it, and serious 
hemorrhage within the abdominal 
cavity may follow, which may be 
fatal. 

Gonorrhea is the most frequent 
infection of the Fallopian tubes, ac¬ 
counting, it is estimated, for 70 per 
cent of Fallopian infections. The 
symptoms of the acute stage resemble 
those of acute appendicitis. The 
temperature rises, the white blood 
cells increase, and the abdomen is 
tender to the touch. The infection 
may become chronic without acute 
manifestations, causing long-lasting 
ill health and eventually sterility. 

Antibiotic and sulfa drugs axe 
effectively used to treat gonococcal 
infection of the Fallopian tubes 
whereas formerly surgery was re¬ 
quired. In the most serious cases, 
however, surgery may stiff be found 
necessary. 

Tuberculosis or other infectious 
diseases may also attack the Fallopian 
tubes. Infection associated with m- 
flammation of the tubes is known as 
salpingitis. See also ectopic peeg- 

NANCY. 


FALLOUT PEOTECTION. Faiiout 
is tin> particles of dust and debris 
that are made radioactive by nu¬ 
clear explosions. When an atomic 
or hydrogen bomb is exploded close 
to the ground thousands of tons of 
these particles are sucked up into 
the air and help form the mushroom 
cloud seen when a nuclear explosion 
occurs. As the cloud disintegrates, 
much of the radioactive particles 
accumulate in the atmosphere and 
are carried by the wind for thou¬ 
sands of miles. This is the contro¬ 
versial, widely publicized nuclear 
fallout which later returns to earth, 
perhaps over a period of years, con¬ 
taminating by their cumulative 
effect water, milk and other foods 
at a distant time. However, the re¬ 
mainder of the radioactive fallout 
presents a danger directly after the 
explosion. This fallout descends 
within an area that can extend for 
hundreds of miles, and can bring 
widespread death and injury over a 
period of days or weeks. It is this 
fallout, dangerous immediately after 
the detonation, that is immediately 
vital. 

In the actual vicinity of a nuclear 
explosion, almost all life not pro¬ 
tected in strong blast-proof shelters 
would be destroyed by blast, heat, 
or massive radiation. Survivors out¬ 
side this area of destruction would 
be subjected to dangerous radio¬ 
active fallout, usually without know¬ 
ing it. This fallout may sometimes 
be seen in the form of fine ash or 
dust, but the rays emitted by the 
radioactive particles can neither be 


349 




iSSPli 























FALLOUT PiOTECTIOM 


FALLOUT PiOTECTiOr^ 


seen nor felt. Only weight or mass 
of material can give protection 
against these radioactive rays. 

The best protection against radio¬ 
active fallout is an underground 
shelter with at least three feet of 
earth or sand above it. Two feet of 
solid concrete will provide the same 
amount of protection. Solidity is 
essential; hollow concrete Mocks 
should be filled solidly with cement 
mortar. An underground shelter of 
such mass provided with an ade¬ 
quate door and air filter will give 
almost complete protection. Fallout 
after a nuclear explosion will usually 
give a little time for one to reach 
his fallout shelter. It will not arrive 
at a location where there are likely 
to be a number of survivors until 
after about an hour. In more distant 
locations the time may be as much 
as 8 or 10 hours after detonation, 
depending on terrain, wind and 
weather conditions. Defense authori¬ 
ties agree that in planning a protec¬ 
tion program it can generally be 
presumed that survivors of the im¬ 
mediate blast will have about one 
hour to go to their homes or other 
place of protection from fallout. 
Since transportation may not be 
available, the time of one hour 


allows for the distance one can 

travel on foot. 

A program of protection against 
fallout is based on three character¬ 
istics of fallout radiation. The first 
is that radiation reduces with pas¬ 
sage of time. Although early radio¬ 
activity is extremely high, the in¬ 
tensity level declines after seven 
hours to about ten per cent and 
after two days to about one per 
cent. The second characteristic is 
that radiation reduces with distance. 
Radiation is only one-quarter as 
harmful at a distance of 200 feet as 
it is at 100 feet. Thus, by getting 
away from the fallout material— 
by going to the intermediate floors 
of a tali building, or by clearing the 
fallout out of an area— the damaging 
effects of radiation can be greatly 
reduced. Thirdly, radiation is re¬ 
duced by shielding. 

Shielding is the key to a protection 
program against radioactive fallout. 
Radiation easily penetrates ordinary 
materials such as clothing, glass or 
the walls of the average frame 
house. The more dense the material 
interposed between the individual 
and the fallout, the greater the pro¬ 
tection. In a pinch, stopping up 
doors and windows helps, and even 


F0il@yf Protection — Protection against radioactive fallout is practical ond feasible if 
fallout shelters are available. Shelter designs vary according to their specific needs but all 
make use of the principle that effective shielding is the best protection against fallout. A bask 
fallout shelter is the basement shelter (fop left righfK This shelter is usually built in one end 
or corner of a basement. For homes without basements the underground shelter is constructed 
(center left), which either adfoins or is separate from the house. The preshaped metal 
shelter (center right) is also practical for this purpose. For apartment dwellers the central 
area of the ground floor provides good protection (bottom fefti, and if avaif0ble the sub¬ 
surface basement of the building will give the best protection possible. The group shelter 
(bottom right) may be used in areas with large concentrations of military or other personnel. 

J5I 



FAlLOyi FiOTECTiON 


FALLOUT PROTECTION 


stacks of books, magazines, news¬ 
papers or filing cabinets provide 
some protection. Earth and concrete, 
hcmeser, are the safest. If no un¬ 
derground or two-foot concrete shel¬ 
ter is available, staging in a house 
basement will cut down exposure to 
about one-tenth the outside expo¬ 
sure. In such an eventuality, sand¬ 
bagging the windows provides a 
further reduction. In an ordinarv 
house that has no basement, staying 
on the first floor near the center of 
the house would cut down the radi¬ 
ation to about one half. A good rule 
to remember is that if caught in a 
building that has no specially pro- 
\ ided fallout shelter—in office build¬ 
ing or apartment house —basements, 
inside rooms, or corridors are safest. 

A person who suspects he may 
have been in a fallout area should 
wash himself and his clothes thor¬ 
oughly. If the clothes and the water 
cannot be disposed of, the clothes 
should be left outside. Some experts 
advise that outer garments be re¬ 
moved and left outside the shelter 
and the water used for washing be 
thrown outside. If unpackaged food 
has been exposed to fallout, it 
should be decontaminated by peel¬ 
ing and washing. It should not be 
discarded. In emergency it may be 
preferable to eat it, though contam¬ 
inated, rather than be without food. 

In planning for maximum safety 
against fallout. Civil Defense experts 
advise that important survival re¬ 
quirements for individuals and fam¬ 
ilies are: shelter from radioactive 
fallout, a two-week supply of food 


and water, cooking and eating uten¬ 
sils and equipment, fuel, clothing, 
bedding, first aid supplies, special 
medicines (if required by chronic 
illness), sanitation supplies and 
equipment, and a battery-powered 
radio. Two types of simple, inexpen¬ 
sive radiation instruments are also 
recommended: a dose rate meter to 
show the intensities of radiation at 
dilferent locations in and around the 
shelter, and a dosimeter for each in¬ 
dividual to indicate the cumulative 
dosage of radiation received during 
the emergency. If the survival items 
are not stored in the home shelter, 
they should be in a convenient place 
where they can be quickly moved to 
the shelter, or to the car in case of 
evacuation. 

The fallout shelter itself has no 
fixed design but may be compact or 
roomy, according to the needs and 
desires of the individual family. 
Some shelters can be built as a do- 
it-yourself project, others require 
contractors. It is estimated that for 
family shelters 10 square feet per 
person is adequate. Concrete or 
bricks, earth or sand are some of 
the materials suggested; there is 
about the same amount of shielding 
in 8 inches of concrete as in 12 
inches of earth, 16 inches of books 
or 30 inches of wood. If built in a 
completely exposed location, the 
shielding should be the equivalent of 
concrete 18 inches thick. Informa¬ 
tion on fallout shelters and fallout 
protection may. be obtained from 
local Civil Defense offices, or by 
writing to the Office of Civil and 


352 



FARSIGHTEDNESS 


FATIGUE 


Defense Mobilization, Washington 
25, D.C. See also radiation sick¬ 
ness. 

FABSIGHTEDNESS. See eye; pres¬ 
byopia. 

FASTING, abstinence from food, or 
limiting food, for religious, political, 
or medical purposes. For medical 
reasons, resting the stomach may aid 
in the relief of indigestion. Water, 
taken abundantly during a fast, may 
serve to rid the body of accumulated 
waste. A period of fasting is often 
required of diabetics, as a prepara¬ 
tion for undertaking a diet. 

Green vegetables are sometimes 
permitted during a partial fast. They 
provide necessary vitamins, help to 
move the bowels, and also allay the 
discomforts of hunger. Hunger, in¬ 
cidentally, does not constitute a seri¬ 
ous problem in fasting. It is a minor 
inconvenience after the first day; and 
usually, after the second, it is hardly 
noticeable. 

If a fast is planned for a period of 
more than two days, it is well to 
consult a physician in advance. He 
may suggest that the person fasting 
should remain in bed as much as 
possible, to conserve his energy and 
to keep warm. When the fast is 
broken, the consumption of food 
should at first be light and slow. 

FATIGUE. The cells and tissues of 
the body have a remarkable power 
to recover from ordinary fatigue, but 
excessive, prolonged, and accumu¬ 
lated fatigue is dangerous. Fatigue is 
a warning that the person is attempt¬ 
ing to do too much and if this warn¬ 
ing is ignored the fatigue may de¬ 


velop into exhaustion, a condition in 
which the body is severely depleted. 

A proper diet is a good preventive 
against fatigue. Muscles use sugar in 
performing their functions; numerous 
vitamins are essential for satisfactory 
functioning of the nerves; iron is 
required for the blood. A deficiency 
of these as well as other substances 
the body needs brings on fatigue more 
rapidly than when the body is receiv¬ 
ing an adequate diet. 

Fatigue can result from too little 
rest and sleep, from infection and 
disease, poor nutrition and ph 3 isical 
and mental overwork. Some of the 
numerous symptoms of fatigue are 
a tendency to yawn, drowsiness, 
sweating without previous exertion, 
easy irritability, depression, general 
slowness of action or forgetfulness. 
Chronic fatigue induces loss of ap¬ 
petite and weight and increased 
irritability. When fatigue has pro¬ 
gressed to this point, a doctor should 
determine the degree and cause of 
the fatigue. Rest, a change of diet, 
or perhaps a change of occupation 
may relieve the fatigue. 

Four common-sense rules follow: 

(1) The best treatment of fatigue 
is rest. 

(2) Stop physical activity before 
exhaustion is manifest. 

(3) Don’t take stimulants like cof¬ 
fee, “pep” pills or other pick-me-ups. 
The feeling of relief is only tem¬ 
porary and induces further fatigue. 
Taking stimulants is like whipping a 
tired horse. 

(4) If exhaustion is evident, medi¬ 
cal care, including a special study of 


353 



FATS 


FEAR 


the giaiids, is desirable. 

See also exhaustion. 

FATS. See food fats. 

FEAE, a teelmg of agitation caused 
by the presence of danger or pam. 
It is commoii to distinguish fear 
from anxiety, a reaction that is out 
of proportion to the actual danger 
involved and the causes of which 
may be unconscious. However, 
many psychiatrists use the two terms 
interchangeably. 

Fear invariably expresses itself 
m certain bodily changes. For ex¬ 
ample, the adrenal glands become 
more active, the gastrointestinal tract 
may cease functioning, the heart 
beat usually increases in rate, and 
breathing becomes more rapid. Mod¬ 
ern proponents of the “emergency 
theory” of fear, see in these changes 
an attempt of the entire organism 
to prepare itself in such a way as to 
enhance survival. 

Normally, fear is present at birth, 
with the general purpose of pro¬ 
tecting the infant from various stim¬ 
uli of the outside world. There is, 
for instance, fear of loud sounds, 
fear of bright lights, of food that is 
too hot or cold, and so forth. Re¬ 
actions of fear to such stimuli are 
essential in the very young infant 
because his undeveloped nervous 
system cannot tolerate extreme stim¬ 
ulation for any prolonged period. 
Many psychiatrists believe the reac¬ 
tion to such stimuli in the newborn 
to be the basis for fearful reactions 
expressed throughout the early years 
of life and extending into adulthood. 


Parental attitudes play a decisive 
role in the childhood expressions of 
fear. As soon as the child leaves 
the crib and begins to explore his 
surroundings, he is trailed by his 
parents and warned of the dangers 
m objects he may encounter. If a 
needle or a pin in the child’s path on 
the floor is picked up by the parents, 
the child will come to share the 
anxiety of such an object with the 
parents. The same may occur with 
respect to articles of furniture that 
may fall on the child, dirt that may 
make him sick, drafts, heat, etc. 
The average infant experiences all 
these natural defenses against harm¬ 
ful objects. Whether he will “out¬ 
grow” or retain the fears associated 
with them depends upon how much 
emotion is invested in the warning. 
Normally, fear is also related to 
conditions outside the home. For 
example, inclement weafher often 
becomes associated in the infant’s 
mind with harm. Later, vehicular traf¬ 
fic, other children, and adults other 
than the parents may arouse fear in 
the child. Parents should remember 
that the things which they them¬ 
selves fear most are the unknown. 
If a child is given an adequate ex¬ 
planation of the meaning of the 
dark, if he is told about such ani¬ 
mals that might arouse fear, if he 
sees his parents view small cuts, 
bruises and pains with equanimity, 
he is likely to have the same attitude 
toward them. 

There are some children who dis¬ 
play unusual sensitivity to fears, 
even though the parents train the 


354 



FEBilLE 


FEEBLE-MiMDEDNESS 


child within the normal range of 
concern. The child often clings vi¬ 
olently to the parents and is only 
at ease in their presence. Such chil¬ 
dren may go through the early grades 
of school being handed over di¬ 
rectly by the parent to the teacher 
and back to the parent. While in 
class the child may experience nerv¬ 
ousness before the simplest tasks. 
He often finds that with recognition 
of his condition he can gain certain 
advantages over other children in 
compensation for his apparent weak¬ 
ness. In later life he may still em¬ 
ploy the same methods, fear being 
aroused by a vast array of things in 
the environment unless some sort of 
parental figure accompanies him. 

A phobia is characterized by an 
overwhelming fear of special situ¬ 
ations, such as closed or open 
spaces, animals, the dark, etc. Most 
people have relatively unimportant 
fears of this type, but in some indi¬ 
viduals these fears become so in¬ 
tense as to inhibit normal function¬ 
ing of the person. The fears may be 
attached to objects that are often 
harmless in themselves but which 
represent unconscious feelings which 
are the true basis of the fear. The 
person, to keep his unconscious fear 
from coming into consciousness, dis¬ 
places or projects the fear onto the 
outside world in the form of the 
phobia. Thus, being alone or in any 
high place may come to represent 
abandonment. In this way the con¬ 
nection between the unconscious 
feelings and the phobia are often 
hidden. In effect, the phobic individ¬ 


ual blames the external situation in¬ 
stead of his unconscious fear which 
maintains the phobia. 

Fear is often cIoseI> associated 
with feelings of guilt. Many of these 
guilt feelings can be likened to the 
feelings of a phobia in that the\ are 
unconscious. Sexual impotence and 
frigidity frequently may have their 
origin in unconscious guilt which 
may be expressed in their fear of the 
sexual act. Here an earl> attitude of 
disapproval of and guilt toward sexu¬ 
ality in general, as well as parental 
fear of sex which has been trans¬ 
ferred to the child, play a significant 
role. Since these generalized fears 
are actually symptoms involving the 
whole evaluation of oneself and oth¬ 
ers, treatment of these conditions Is 
difficult and involved. Psychotherapy 
has proved successful when the 
treatment involves the whole person¬ 
ality and not just the symptom of 
fear alone. See also anxiety; emo¬ 
tional health; stress. 

FEBRILE, a descriptive term mean¬ 
ing feverish. 

FECES, the excretion from the 
bowels. It consists of undigested res¬ 
idue from food, bacteria and sub¬ 
stances secreted from the intestinal 
walls and from the organs connected 
with the digestive tract. 

FEEBLE-MINDIBNI^ mental 
deficiency or mental defect, a con¬ 
dition in which average inteUigence 
either is not present or fails to de¬ 
velop. It must be clearly distinguished 
from mental disease, such as neurosis 

355 



FEEBLE-MiNDEDNESS 


FEEBLE-MINDEDNESS 


and psychosis,, in which functioBS of 
a mind of normal capacity become 
disordered. 

Different degrees of mental defect 
or feeble-iiiindedBess are recognized. 
A person with an LQ. below 20, who 
doesn't advance past a mental age 
of three, is considered an idiot. 
Custodial care of idiots is necessary. 
They usually present no special prob¬ 
lem, since oMy a few live to adult¬ 
hood and those who do do not pro¬ 
create as they are infantile. Imbeciles 
have I.Q/s below 50. Often they can 
be taught to do certain tasks, but they 
may require protective supervision. 
Morons, who have I.Q.’s below 70, 
generally can be trained to take care 
of themselves, and may even be able 
to support themselves. As well as 
doing domestic tasks, morons have 
held jobs in factories. Training of the 
feeble-minded involves sensory stimu¬ 
lation and development of muscular 
coordination. Good physical condi¬ 
tion is important to help compensate 
for the mental limitation. 

Symptoms of feeble-mindedness 
tend to manifest at an early age, al¬ 
though it is essential to have expert 
opinion regarding each individual 
case, A baby’s failure to be as re¬ 
sponsive to sounds and sights as 
normal, delay in teething and other 
phases of development may indicate 
a tendency to feeble-mindedness. 
However, vaiiatiom in development 


are so great that such symptoms are 
certainly not inevitable indications of 
mental defect. The condition be¬ 
comes more apparent as the child 
grows older and cannot adjust to 
other children or compete with them 
in studies or at play. The mentally 
defective person tends to remain in¬ 
fantile even though he grows phy¬ 
sically. 

Much can be done to prevent men¬ 
tal defectives from being hopeless 
and helpless burdens on others. Such 
capacity as they do have should be 
developed to the fullest rather than 
deprecated and neglected. They 
should be taught physical coordina¬ 
tion to the greatest possible extent. 
They should be schooled as far as 
their capacity permits, but removed 
from situations in which repeated un¬ 
successful competition with children 
may give them acute feelings of in¬ 
feriority and defeat. Special institu¬ 
tions for training the feeble-minded 
are available. 

Individual attention is essential in 
caring for the mentally defective. 
Attempts to apply the same routine 
to a large group of feeble-minded 
persons are ineffective, because each 
one responds quite differently, de¬ 
pending on the extent of Ms abffity. 

Feeble-mindedness has a heredi¬ 
tary tendency. Normal people, in no 
sense mentally defective themselves, 
may be carriers of mental defect; that 


Feelii©-iwl«dlecliiess — Classification of the feeble-minded. Intelligence quotient (I.Q.) Is 
the ratio of mental age, as measured by the I.Q, test, to the actual age tn years. The maxi¬ 
mum actual age of an adult is a!w 0 ys given as 15 years because, on the average, neurological 
development stops at this time. Learning, of course, continues throughout life and may even 
be more rapid because on© "learns to learn.'^ As can be seen from the diagram, those who 
ore low morons or less can never be self-sufficient. Such people require special care in order 
to be happy and productive. 


J56 








FEEDING, BREAST 


FEEDING, BREAST 


IS, they are geaetically capable of 
traosmittog the defect to offspring. 
Feeble-minded persons should not 
marry, and those who have had a 
feeble-mmded ancestor should rec¬ 
ognize the potentiality of having a 
defective child 

Recent research has demonstrated 
that factors other than heredity may 
be responsible for feeble-mindedness. 
Sickness of the mother during preg¬ 
nancy and injury during delivery of 
the infant have been suggested as 
possible causes, and still others may 
be found. Parents should not feel 
themselves to blame when a mentally 
defective child appears in the family. 

FEEDING, BREAST. Conflicting 
ideas about breast feeding a baby— 
that is, feeding directly from the 
breast—as opposed to bottle feeding 
have produced some confusion in the 
minds of mothers, especially those 
who are having their first ch il d. The 
weight of opinion favors feeding at 
the breast. A formula in the bottle, 
if the doctor’s prescription and the 
mother’s preparation are correct, will 
provide adequate nourishment, but 
human milk contains valuable quali¬ 
ties which are not present in other 
forms of milk. Also, the latest in¬ 
vestigations indicate that the breast¬ 
fed baby probably has a psychological 
advantage over the bottle-fed baby; 
even though the mother who feeds 
her baby by bottle holds him tenderly 
and affectionately, the bottle does in 
some way impede the direct com¬ 
munication between mother and 
child. However, breast feeding when 
it is done with a hurried and indif¬ 


ferent attitude can be emotionally 
unsatisfactory to the child, just as 
bottle feeding can give the child the 
feeling of security and love he needs. 
Above all, the attitude of the mother 
is important. 

During the months of pregnancy 
much can be done to prepare the 
prospective mother for the task of 
breast feeding her baby. The doctor 
can recommend special care of the 
breasts, diet, massage, techniques for 
adjusting the shape of the nipples. A 
hospital can be selected which offers 
special facilities for the nursing 
mother. 

The first days of nursing are a time 
in which the mother and child come 
to know each other. The child may 
at first refuse to take the breast, but 
if the mother is relaxed the child will 
probably begin to suck as soon as the 
nipple is introduced into his mouth. 
The first substance which is received 
is not milk but a yellowish thick 
liquid called colostrum. Under the 
stimulus of the infant’s mouth the 
breasts quickly begin to release a thin 
blue milk. The nursing mother should 
keep in touch with her doctor during 
the first few weeks. The milk may not 
agree with the child; the child may 
get too much or too little milk at a 
feeding; he may eruct part of the in¬ 
take, get colic pains, or other situ¬ 
ations may arise which should be 
brought to the attention of the doctor. 
In general, the doctor vnU want to be 
sure that the mother is in good health 
and receiving the proper rest and 
food, exercise and recreation, and 
that the infant is progressing nor¬ 
mally. 


358 



FEET 


FEET 


Occasionally breast and bottle feed¬ 
ing may be effectively combined. 
This may be necessary if the mother 
is sometimes absent from home dur¬ 
ing feeding time or if she cannot 
keep up the necessary supply of milk. 
Such a combination should be ar¬ 
ranged with the help of the doctor. 
The combination of breast and bottle 
feeding usually will facilitate wean¬ 
ing. 

The mother must decide which 
method will be used to feed the child. 
As stated, breast feeding is usually 
better for the baby, both physically 
and psychologically. It also eliminates 
the daily chore of cleaning bottle 
equipment and preparing the for¬ 
mula. Whatever method the mother 
decides to follow, the feeding should 
be administered with love and affec¬ 
tion. See also child care. 

FEET. Feet are subject to a great 
variety of ailments. These include 
sprains, strains, dislocations, frac¬ 
tures, excessive sweating, warts, chil¬ 
blains, ringworm, hammertoes, pain¬ 
ful heels, ingrown toenails, cracked 
toes, blisters, bruises, circulation dis¬ 
turbances, fallen arches, corns, bun¬ 
ions and calluses, and many others. 
Some of these are incurred during 
athletic activities, some are due to 
faulty footwear, and others are pres¬ 
ent at birth. 

Fallen arches refers to a painful 
condition affecting the main bone of 
the foot, the astragalus. This afiBiction 
is especially common among people 
whose work requires many hours 
of standing or walking. The pain is 
due to the spasmodic efforts of cer¬ 


tain muscles to overcome the strain 
which is placed on the tissues. Often 
the person can terminate the pain 
simply by getting off his feet. 

Ordinarily, however, fallen arches 
require special treatment. Hot appli¬ 
cations and massages taken at the 
end of the day are beneficial. Even 
more important is the appropriate 
choice of shoes. Generally shoes 
should be specially fitted with a 
medium-width rigid shank which 
supports the arch. 

Among the most common of all 
foot complaints are calluses, corns, 
and bunions. When the skin is per¬ 
sistently rubbed, it tends to thicken. 
Such thickening, callus, develops 
most frequently on the bottom of the 
foot, usually at a point where con¬ 
stant pressure is exerted. For ex¬ 
ample, the golfer may develop a 
callus at the place on his foot where 
he pivots when driving the baU. A 
callus can be removed by the doctor. 
The real problem is how to prevent 
its return. Sometimes this can be 
done by padding the shoes in such a 
way as to shift the point of pressure 
on the foot 

A callus on the toes, between the 
toes, or—especially—on the outer 
part of the little toes is a com. The 
soft com, produced by a mbbing 
together of the little toe and the 
fourth toe, is a frequent point of in¬ 
fection, especially of ringworm. A 
majority of the numerous commercial 
cures for corns make use of salicylic 
acid, a drag which if given sufficient 
time will cause the com to fall away. 
The only cure is an operation, seldom 
done, which removes not only the 


359 



FEET 


FEET 



^ ^ r • f 







com but also a part of the bone be¬ 
neath the com. 

A bunion is a swelling produced 
by the inflammation of a bursa, a 
fluid-containing sac located between 
the tendon and a bone which serves 
to facilitate action. Bunions are 
found most often on the outer part 
of the big toe. They may also appear, 

360 


however, in the middle of the top 
of the foot, where the person may 
have laced his shoes too tightly. 
This type of bunion can be re¬ 
lieved by inserting pads under the 
laces or by avoiding shoes which 
lace. Bunions resemble corns in that 
permanent relief may be found only 
in surgery. However, surgery for 



FELON 


FELON 


bunions is frequently and success¬ 
fully done. 

Care of the feet. The feet should 
be bathed once a day, then carefully 
dried and perhaps dusted with talcum 
or a germicidal powder so that moist 
areas will not rub together and pro¬ 
duce infection. The general health of 
the feet may be improved by use of 
the so-caUed contrast bath. The per¬ 
son places his two feet first in one 
pah filled with hot water, and then 
in another filled with cold water. The 
feet should remain in each pail for 
about one minute, and the entire 
operation should continue for ten 
minutes. The purpose is to open and 
close the veins in such a manner as 
to encourage blood circulation. Mas¬ 
sage of the feet is also beneficial and 
should be done with a circular 
movement of the fingers. If the skin 
is unusually sensitive, cold cream 
may be used in the massage. 

For the general health of the feet, 
nothing is more significant than care¬ 
ful selection of shoes, properly fitted 
to the individual foot. The most 
crucial measurement is that from 
the back of the heel to the middle 
of the big toe. Many persons, includ¬ 
ing shoe salesmen, speak of breaking 
in a pair of tight shoes. This is an 
incorrect notion; it is the feet which 
are broken m. This is especially dan¬ 
gerous if the tightness of the shoe 
is longitudinal, where the tendency is 
to force certain toes into a right 
angle position, causing the hammer¬ 
toe. A hammertoe may become so 
serious that it can only be relieved by 
an operation. Healthful shoes will 
always have round toes and shanks 


of only medium width. Extremes in 
the height and location of heels ought 
to be avoided. Specialists usually rec¬ 
ommend a daily change of shoes. 
Shoes which are not being worn 
should be kept in shoe trees to re¬ 
tain their shape. Rubber heels possess 
therapeutic value because they de¬ 
crease the shock effect on both feet 
and body. See also AjRCHES, fallen; 
athlete’s foot; bunion; callus; 

FLATFOOT. 

FELON, an infection at the bottom 
of a fingernail which may be caused 
by staphylococcus or another pus- 
forming germ. 

Home remedies like painting with 
iodine and other antiseptics or the 
application of hot wet packs soaked 
in boric acid solution are not always 
effective and the condition may get 
worse. If the infection penetrates 
muscular tissue, the bone covering, or 
the bone, the condition is serious and 
should be treated promptly by a 
doctor. 

The doctor prevents pus and infec¬ 
tion from penetrating deeper by soak¬ 
ing the finger in hot water to soften 
the tissue. Then by surgical pro¬ 
cedure he releases the pus from the 
infected area. Hot packs soaked in 
boric acid are then applied and 
followed by painting with iodine. 

If a felon is not controlled, the 
infection may spread along the 
lymphatic ducts and tissues into 
other parts of the body and produce 
a generalized infection. Indication of 
such diffusion is the appearance of 
red inflammatory lines nmning up¬ 
ward through the hand and wrist. 


361 



FEMININE HYGIENE 


FEMININE HYGIENE 


FEMININE HYGIENE 

H}g!ene in women differs from 
!i\giene in general only as it con¬ 
cerns Itself with certain qualities 
which are special to the human fe¬ 
male, Specifically these include the 
well-being of those parts of the 
bod\ associated with reproduction 
throughout the entire life of a 
woman and particularly during 
pregnancy. The emotional or social 
well-being of w'omen is discussed 
here only when these aspects are 
closely interw'oven with the physical. 

Infancy. Good hygiene is closely 
associated with ordinary common- 
sense cleanliness. This starts at birth 
with the diapering of the baby girl. 
Leaving soiled diapers on too long 
may lead to uncomfortable irrita¬ 
tion, the usual reaction of sensitive 
skin to acid secretions. A baby with 
d sore itchy ''bottom'' is not a happy 
baby. We use the term "bottom” fre¬ 
quently to refer to the entire anal- 
vaginal region, including the excre¬ 
tory opening and the genitals. Ac¬ 
tually there is no medical word 
which covers this area. 

Diaper rash can generally be 
avoided by cleansing a baby girl's 
skin with mineral oil and changing 
the diapers frequently. If a rash does 
develop, the diapers will need spe¬ 
cial attention such as boiling and 
rinsing in a solution that inhibits 
bacterial growth. A commercial dia¬ 
per service is better than home 
washing because it provides steri¬ 
lized diapers that are less likely to 
cause irritation. 

Irritated skin needs protection. 


Bathing the affected area with cool 
water containing a little starch and 
powdering with borated talc usually 
prove soothing. Soap should be 
avoided at this time since it can 
irritate an already inflamed skin. If 
these simple measures do not lead 
to prompt relief, consult the doctor. 

Childhood. As a baby girl grows 
older, other causes of irritation may 
appear in the genital area. Even a 
very young child can acquire worms; 
this in turn can lead to intense itch¬ 
ing around the anus. 

Itching is a violent sensation 
which demands relief. This is usu¬ 
ally achieved by rubbing or scratch¬ 
ing and such rubbing may be falsely 
interpreted as masturbation. By di¬ 
recting attention to the sensitive 
genital area, however, the irritation 
may lead to masturbation. 

Babies explore all parts of their 
bodies and in doing so explore their 
genitals too. This casual handling of 
the genitals as well as actual mastur¬ 
bation often cause great concern 
among parents. For some reason our 
society associates sin and uncleanli¬ 
ness with such practice. Parents 
should realize that masturbation gen¬ 
erally does no harm and is widely 
practiced by almost all children at 
one time or another. Physically it 
causes nothing more serious than an 
occasional local irritation. Genuine 
emotional suffering, however, can 
come to a child who has been told 
by an adult that masturbation will 
bring horrible results such as in¬ 
sanity or blindness or sterility. If 
parents can look upon childhood 


362 



feminine hygiene 


FEMININE HYGIENE 


masturbation as a normal part of 
sexual growing up, they will be able 
to be more casual about it. But 
excessive masturbation, when a girl 
seems to be withdrawing too much 
within herself for satisfaction, pre¬ 
sents a real problem. This will rarely 
occur in an otherwise emotionally 
sound and happy child. In this case 
the problem of masturbation is only 
a symptom of a more complicated 
emotional disturbance which will 
probably need the help of a profes¬ 
sionally trained consultant. 

Of course, sensible physical meas¬ 
ures should be taken to relieve any 
irritation and itching around the 
genitals. Soaking the “bottom” in 
tepid water to which a small amount 
of baking soda has been added usu¬ 
ally affords gentle relief. If the 
vulvar area—the tissue surrounding 
the vaginal opening—is acutely in¬ 
flamed, however, expert advice will 
be needed. In dressing the little girl, 
always remember that tight clothing, 
particularly panties, can start or ag¬ 
gravate an irrtation in the genital 
area. 

Sometimes a little girl is brought 
to a doctor because of a discharge 
that soils her underwear. The 
mother is afraid that her daughter 
has acquired a venereal disease. 
Venereal disease does occasionally 
occur in children of both sexes, 
either spread accidentally from a 
diseased person or by actual sexual 
contact. But it is exceedingly rare 
among children, especially if there is 
any supervision of their activities. 
Other infections are more common 


in little girls. The mother may have 
some type of vaginal infection ac¬ 
companied by discharge. If she is 
careless about her towels, the germs 
may be carried from mother to 
daughter and the infection spread in 
this way. Although not serious, the 
discharge is odorous and the irrita¬ 
tion unpleasant. Generally this type 
of inflammation can be quickly cor¬ 
rected by suitable treatment. 

Probably the most common cause 
ot a yellow malodorous discharge 
in a little girl is a foreign body in 
the vagina. Children frequently in¬ 
sert small objects into the vagina, 
the most frequently found objects 
being buttons, hairpins, small pen¬ 
cils, and pieces of paper. This object 
generally becomes “lost” and sets up 
a rather violent reaction with odor 
and discharge which persists until 
the foreign body is removed. 

The presence of any excessive 
discharge, particularly a malodorous 
discharge, is not normal during 
childhood and should be brought to 
the attention of a physician for 
treatment. 

Adolescence. As the little girl 
matures and approaches puberty, 
certain changes become obvious. 
The breasts develop, hair begins to 
grow in the armpits (axilla) and 
over the genital area (pubis), and 
skin pimples usually appear for the 
first time. In addition, an increase in 
vaginal secretion may occur for a 
few days each month and a more 
distinct body odor develops for the 
first time. All these changes are per¬ 
fectly natural; the little girl is being 


363 



FEMININE HYGIENE 


FEMININE HYGIENE 


transformed into an adult. Before 
long she will have her first menstrual 
period, the herald ot sexual maturit>. 
\\ ith menstruation, the child be¬ 
comes a biological adult; she is now 
phvsicalh capable oi being a 
mother. The growth of breasts, hair, 
the pimples and the odors are all a 
normal part of her growing up. But 
the girl should be prepared ahead of 
time for what is coming, particularly 
for the onset of menstruation. 

Man\ people have an erroneous 
idea that menstruation is a process 
b\ which the body rids itself of 
'“bad"' blood. That is absolutely 
false Menstruation has been aptly 
described as the ‘'weeping of the 
disappointed womb,” Each month, 
from puberty until the menopause, 
an egg matures in the ovary and is 
available for fertilization. At the 
same time, the uterus (womb) pre¬ 
pares a suitable bed to receive that 
egg if it is fertilized. If the egg is 
not fertilized, the bed or lining of 
the uterus is cast off—the menstrua] 
flow. The process is repeated month 
after month throughout the mature 
life of a woman in hopeful prepara¬ 
tion for the times when fertilized 
eggs will appear. 

When she is approaching sexual 
maturity, the explanation of why she 
will bleed for a few days every 
month should be given to the girl. 
She should also be instructed in ad¬ 
vance in the use of a sanitary belt 
and pad to avoid needless soiling 
and embarrassment. 

You will probably find that your 
daughter has been briefed by her 


schoolmates for what is to come. 
You will want to check on this and 
be sure that she has not picked up 
false information and also to allay 
her fears and answer her many ques¬ 
tions. If you do not feel up to doing 
this, turn to someone who can, but 
do not ignore the situation. Evasion 
only brings unnecessary anxieties. 
And your daughter may turn to 
others, usually youngsters whose in¬ 
formation is deficient and distorted. 
A good book or pamphlet is helpful, 
especially in showing how the re¬ 
productive organs work. But noth¬ 
ing can take the place of a friendly 
and frank discussion between 
mother and daughter. 

Here are some common questions 
that arise in connection with puberty 
and menstruation: 

What can I do about perspiration 
and body odors? Odor goes with 
perspiration. After puberty, the 
sweat glands and sebaceous glands, 
particularly in the armpit and groin, 
secrete substances which have a 
characteristic odor because these 
areas are not exposed to the free 
circulation of air and secretions are 
easily decomposed by bacterial ac¬ 
tion which sometimes leads to of¬ 
fensive odors. This is ail normal but 
nevertheless undesirable. Odor from 
the body in general can be mini¬ 
mized by frequent bathing and fre¬ 
quent changing of underclothes. 
Odor from the armpit is at times 
difficult to control. Shaving the 
underarm is esthetically desirable 
and makes it easier to apply antiper™ 
spirants and deodorants. The many 


364 



FEMININE HYGIENE 


FEMININE HYGIENE 


antiperspirants now on the market 
vary from powder to salves and 
pastes and also liquids in spray bot¬ 
tles. Most of today’s commercial 
preparations are time-tested, effec¬ 
tive, and relatively nonirritating. In 
their advertising, most emphasize 
the deodorant qualities and mini¬ 
mize the antiperspirant because ac¬ 
tual suppression of perspiration is 
much more difficult to maintain. 
In stubborn cases, it may be advis¬ 
able to use a combined treatment: 
shaving and bathing the area, then 
applying either a liquid or salve and 
finally a deodorant powder. 

Odor from the vulva and va¬ 
ginal area will be discussed in more 
detail later. Perspiration and seba¬ 
ceous secretions here may create 
the same problem as armpit per¬ 
spiration. Sometimes, during warm 
weather, clipping or even shaving 
the hair in the pubic region may be 
advisable. A deodorant powder ef¬ 
fectively controls odor from this 
source. 

Occasionally a woman suffers 
from malodorous feet. Here the 
problem is usually more than one of 
lack of cleanliness. Malodorous and 
excessive perspiration of the feet is 
not a condition easy to eradicate. It 
usually requires the attention of a 
skin specialist. 

What can be done for undesir¬ 
able hair? An excessive or dark 
growth of facial and body hair may 
result from many causes, some nor¬ 
mal, some abnormal. Many normal 
women—especially those of swarthy 
complexion—are subject to the 


growth of facial and body hair that 
they find unattractive. Hair on the 
arms and legs can easily be re¬ 
moved by depilatories, by wax, or 
by shaving. Superfluous facial hair, 
however, requires expert Ireatment 
and generally is best removed by 
electrolysis. But electrolysis cre¬ 
ates some practical problems. The 
hair is removed very slowly, the 
treatment is costly, and often there 
is a tendency for the hair to re¬ 
grow. The high cost alone may call 
for another method of hair removal. 
One can turn to chemical depila¬ 
tories but there is always the dan¬ 
ger of skin irritation which is par¬ 
ticularly noticeable on the face. 
There are also specially prepared 
waxes for use on the face. But per¬ 
haps the simplest and best solution 
is shaving. Shaving does not make 
the hair grow more rapidly or cause 
it to become coarser. 

What sort of sanitary pads should 
be used? The external, Kotex-type 
of pad is the most commonly used 
nowadays. The wick, internal, or 
Tampax-type of protection is less 
widely used because it cannot be 
used under all circumstances. In 
virgins, the vaginal orifice may 
not be large enough to admit its 
insertion. Normally a thin mem¬ 
brane, the hymen, covers this ori¬ 
fice. Normally also there is an open¬ 
ing in this membrane which permits 
the escape of menstrual blood. But 
in some girls this opening may not 
be large enough for the insertion of 
the wick. Whether there is adequate 
room can best be determined by a 


365 



FEMININE HYGIENE 


FEMININE HYGIENE 


physician. After marriage, the open¬ 
ing usually becomes large enough 
for insertion of the wick. During 
the first two days of a menstrual 
period, however, the amount of flow 
often is more than the wick can ab¬ 
sorb. Many women, therefore, use 
the ordinary pad during the days of 
heavy flow and the wick as the flow 
tapers off. Properly used, internal 
protection is safe, comfortable, and 
convenient. 

May one bathe or go swimming 
during menstruation? The answer is 
yes, providing the water is not too 
cold, A chilling bath is apt to bring 
about a sudden cessation of menstru¬ 
ation; but there isn’t the slightest ob¬ 
jection to showers or tub baths in 
warm water. Swimming presents 
different problems. What about the 
bulkiness and wetness of the pad, or 
the possibility of blood escaping? 
Both problems are readily solved by 
using the internal wick, if it is ana¬ 
tomically possible and the flow is 
not too heavy. Otherwise, it is best 
to forgo swimming for this period. 

What about going to dances and 
parties during menstruation? It can 
do no harm at all and usually no 
one is the wiser. 

Marriage. With marriage, a new 
series of problems and questions 
concerning feminine hygiene present 
themselves. In books and advertise¬ 
ments, a great deal of space has 
been devoted to the subject of 
douching. It is sometimes recom¬ 
mended as a hygienic measure fol¬ 
lowing sexual union. But actually 
there are very few circumstances 

^66 


when a douche is needed and as a 
general practice douching is physi¬ 
ologically unsound and illogical be¬ 
cause the vagina is a muscular 
pouch that must remain moist in 
order to serve its function. This 
moisture comes from the mucous se¬ 
cretions of the cervix (the opening 
of the womb) and from the cast¬ 
off lining cells of the vagina. The 
amount of secretion, particularly of 
the cervical mucus, varies normal¬ 
ly during the menstrual cycle, be¬ 
ing most abundant during the mid¬ 
cycle when the egg is passed. In ad¬ 
dition, sexual stimulation increases 
the secretion from accessory glands 
before and during the sexual act. In 
other words, the female secretions 
during and after intercourse are 
quite normal and necessary. Follow¬ 
ing the climax, male semen is de¬ 
posited in the vagina. But since the 
vagina is a muscular organ and 
drains by gravity, this secretion will 
run out naturally upon completion 
of the act, leaving no need for a 
douche. 

Perhaps douching has been re¬ 
commended to you as a contracep¬ 
tive agent. If so, it is an extremely 
poor choice. Even when used purely 
as a cleansing agent following 
coitus, a douche is ineffective since 
nothing remains to be cleansed. If 
you feel like it, a bath or shower 
after intercourse is a much better 
idea. Unfortunately many women 
have been raised to consider douch¬ 
ing an essential part of their daily 
toilet and must be re-educated to 
accept the fact that douching does 
not serve a useful function. 



FEMININE HYGIENE 


FEMINiNE HYGiENE 


Two other occasions for which 
douching has been thought useful 
are the completion of the menstrual 
period and when a diaphragm has 
been used in intercourse. Here again 
douching is not the answer. If the 
period is truly finished, the last 
vestige of blood disappears rapidly 
without douching. If a diaphragm is 
used, there is no reason to douche; 
simply wash the diaphragm after it 
is removed and bathe if you wish. 

What about douching if one suf¬ 
fers from ieucorrhea or excessive 
vagina! discharge? The answer again 
is no. There is a cause for these 
conditions and to treat the condi¬ 
tion properly the cause must be de¬ 
termined. Excessive discharge may 
be the earliest sign of cancer of the 
female organs; it may be due to ex¬ 
cessive sexual stimulation or to one 
of several microscopic organisms 
which are not too serious but ex¬ 
tremely annoying. Leucorrhea may 
be due to venereal infection, to for¬ 
eign bodies, to erosion of the cer¬ 
vix, or, as already mentioned, the 
flow may be a perfectly normal 
phenomenon. Only a physician can 
advise proper treatment. Certainly 
washing out the secretion by douch¬ 
ing do^s not do permanent good. 

But doesn’t douching get rid of 
vaginal odors? The answer again is 
no! In health, there are no offensive 
vaginal odors. Offensive odors arise 
from disease or from failure to keep 
the vulvar and anal areas clean. 
Dribbling urine leads to a urine 
odor; improper cleansing after a 
bowel movement leads to a fecal 
odor; the presence of a cancer or a 


foreign body causes a fetid odor; in¬ 
fections due to >east or to an or¬ 
ganism know^n as trichomonas cause 
characteristic unpleasant odors. 
None of these conditions is relieved 
by douching, except perhaps tem¬ 
porarily. And none of them can be 
cured by douching, only by remov¬ 
ing the cause. 

All too frequently a physician en¬ 
counters patients who lack the basic 
knowledge of how to cleanse the 
anal area. Proper cleansing is best 
attained by using water, tissue, or by 
actual bathing, using a non-irritat¬ 
ing soap. Dry cleaning at best is 
second best. 

Many people wonder about the 
danger of having sexual relations 
during the menstrual period. There 
is nothing harmful about having in¬ 
tercourse during menstruation, but 
the practice is untidy and may there¬ 
by hurt the relationship. 

Pregnancy, During pregnancy 
many questions arise. May I take 
tub baths? May I wash my hair? Is 
intercourse proper? What about ex¬ 
cessive vaginal discharge and odors? 

Bathing is not only proper but 
desirable. There was a time when 
tub baths were considered danger¬ 
ous during the latter weeks of 
pregnancy, but nowadays the water 
supply in most modern communities 
is pure and the fear of contamina¬ 
tion is unwarranted. The only dan¬ 
ger from a tub bath is the risk of a 
fall while getting in or out of the 
tub; a little caution will prevent 
this. 

Washing the hair is quite harm¬ 
less and so is having a '"permanent.” 


367 



FEEMENTATION 


FERMENTATION 


During pregnancy, however, the 
pernianent does not hold weli and 
the results may not justify the time 
and money expended, 

intercourse is proper during preg¬ 
nancy but precaution should be 
taken during the early and iate 
periods to refrain from roughness. 
Early in pregnancy, the stimulation 
may cause miscarriage; late, it may 
lead to premature labor. Generally, 
how'ever, with gentleness harm will 
not ensue. 

The problem of the vaginal dis¬ 
charge in the pregnant woman is the 
same as in the nonpregnant. While 
the congestion of late pregnancy 
leads to increased secretion, this is 
a nonirritating and odorless flow. 
An irritating odorous secretion is 
abnormal and calls for medical in¬ 
vestigation. 

After the Baby Arrives. Before 
childbirth, the breasts do not require 
any special care. The watery secre¬ 
tion which may be expressed from 
the nipple from the earliest months 
of pregnancy can be removed by or¬ 
dinary bathing. After the milk flow 
is established, the problem is not 
dilferent. The breasts should be 
washed with mild soap and tepid 
water daily and the nippies should 
be cleansed with plain water be¬ 
fore each feeding. 

“Hardening'’ or conditioning the 
nipples prior to actual nursing has 
been attempted through many dif¬ 
ferent procedures for years. But 
there does not seem to be any benefit 
from, this. The secret of good nurs¬ 
ing and' preventing the nipple from 


cracking is to nurse frequently and 
not to permit the baby to bite the 
nipple. This is accomplished by car¬ 
rying the nipple forward so that it 
rests on the baby's tongue. 

Bathing either with tub baths or 
showers can be resumed shortly 
after childbirth. The warm water im¬ 
parts a sense of well-being, relieves 
the achiness in the region of the 
stitches, and does much to wash 
away the odorous secretions which 
always follow childbirth. The va¬ 
ginal discharge or lochia persists up 
to four to six weeks and the odor 
may be disturbing. In addition to 
bathing, a deodorant salve may be 
applied to an external pad. Internal 
wicks should not be used until the 
doctor has given his permission. The 
basic essential in feminine hygiene, it 
should be emphasized, is: “Cleanli¬ 
ness is next to godliness.” 

FERMENTATION. When a fer¬ 
ment, or enzyme, induces an alter¬ 
ation in any substance involving de¬ 
composition or effervescence, the 
process is known as fermentation. 

Alcohol is produced by a ferment 
known as yeast. When yeast is added 
to a solution of water and grape 
sugar, a froth consisting of carbon 
dioxide is formed. In the midst of 
this process, the sugar content de¬ 
clines and alcohol begins to appear. 
In similar manner beverages such as 
wine and beer are produced. If any 
of these alcoholic beverages later 
acquire a sour or vinegary taste, it is 
due to another enzyme, known as 
mycoderma aceti, which has changed 
part of the alcohol into acetic acid. 










HOME 

NURSING 


BEFORE 

BREAKFAST 


I 







iJ 


•k 


I 

I 


Observation of condition (pain, discom* 
fort, range of motion, etc.) 


Temperature, pulse, and respiration (as 
ordered by doctor) 

Bedpan, commode (or toifet if permitted) 


Face and hands washed 


Mouth and teeth cleaned 


Back rest or pillows placed in good posi¬ 
tion for breakfast 

Bath: if convenient for patient or for 
household this can be planned for the 
afternoon or evening 


Medicines and treatment, as ordered by 
the doctor 


Bedpan when required 



BREAKFAST 


Patient's room cleaned and put in order 


Up in chair, or assisted in walking (if 
ordered by doctor) 


Rest or diversion, according to need, 
before lunch 











Report accurately 

"I 

Note whether patient turns with less as¬ 
sistance and freer range of motion than 
on previous day 


Done by nurse and recorded for doctor 

Required to lie flat at all times 

Can do if rolled on side and basin put 1 

Have pillows ready to slip under back 
and shoulders to maintain position while 
on bedpan 

on table | 

1 Place basin and toilet articles within 

% reach 

Can do if rolled on side and basin put ■ 

on table | 

Put straw in glass, emesis basin close to 
bedside edge of table 

Can roll on side, maintaining spine in I 

good alignment I 

Place pillows at back to support and keep 
from rolling away from side of bed 

Washes dwn face, combs own hair, cares 
for fingernails 

Finish bed bath. Likes baby lotion instead 
of alcohol for back rub. Give special 
attention to skin on shoulders and base 
of spine. Check range of joint motion 


Explain treatment to patient Carry it out. 
Observe and record results. Put awa}/ 
equipment 

Request when needed 

Put signaling device-bell, or glass anc 
spoon-within easy reach of patient 


Keep patient protected from drafts, dust 
unnecessary noise, and bumping of bee 

Can follow nurse's guidance while being 
lifted out of bed 

Because -patient has had a fracture, doc¬ 
tor wishes him lifted into chair *1o| 
fashion^' by three people. Murse plans 
and instructs helpers and patient Ar 
ranges chair ahead of time. Observes 
carefully for discomfort after moving 
Moves signaling device within easy react 
of patient 

Can do little work for short period of 
time and enjoys it but does not realize 
fatigue 

Place books, magazines, handwork, o 
other diversionai materials within easj 
reach. Observe tendency to become over 
tired 














Rest or diversion, according to need, 
after lunch 







jPatipnt posittoned comfortably for the 
night, signal device within reach. Night 
table arranged so that niirse can look In 
fatsr, add^ esdia >|jeddj<^. ete. If necefr; 
^^,withl^nii8^ngitfte'profit , • 


Enjoys visitors and conversation. Will 
recognize overexertion and ask friends 
to leave if tired 


Will know which visitors cheer the pa¬ 
tient and “bring the world in to him," 
helping him to regain perspective, and 
which ones he requires some protection 
from. She will act according to this 
knowledge 

Substitute nurse must know patient’s 
likes and dislikes as well as doctor’s diet 
recommendations 


As in A.M. 


As in A.M. 


Arrange as for morning meal. Prefers 
lunch dessert in mid-afternoon. Give ma¬ 
terials for handwork but be ready to 
alternate with passive diversion such as 
radio in not more than half an hour 


Can wash if rolled on side, basin properly 
placed 


Contributes to general conversation. Helps 
school children with special projects 


Put patient and toilet articles in position, 
as in A.M. Give special care to skin at 
pressure points on back 


A5inA.M. 

Keep noise and confusion to a minimum 
but encourage family activities in pa¬ 
tios room. When possible, include pa- 
m all plans for Mure 








Virus spread by Rash of tiny red pimples 12 to 20 days, ilighly contagious No imniimixtition, 

discharge from nose, on body and face sometimes as from few days before One attack usually 

mouth, and fluid develop blisters in long as 25 days. rash appears to establishes immunity, 

of blisters. center. New pox con- about 1 week after. Use calomiiie lotion 

tinue to appear for 3-4 or baking-soda paste 



•.9 0S 

o ^ ft) {3 
’3 43 2 o 

-o J -g o 

S s ea flS o 

4> b H 

- P-o 


i o &! I 

on ^ > ca 2 9 


t'S g & 

cn css 


S’gl 


8 O -I S S 

P5 a *9 a,«2 






































or lightcii attack! 





















FERTILITY 


FEVEi 


To further illustrate the process of 
fermeatation, if lactic acid bacillus, 
another enzyme^ is added to milk 
sugar instead of grape sugar, lactic 
acid results* This occurs in the proc¬ 
ess of souring milk and also in the 
production of artificial buttermilk. If 
this enzyme produces fermentation in 
the stomach, the resultant carbon 
dioxide may lead to the formation of 
gas. The process of fermentation is 
also important in the production of 
bread and many other foods and in¬ 
dustrial materials. See also enzyme. 

FERTILITY, the power of repro¬ 
duction, has been noted in females as 
young as eight years and as old as 
sixty. Among males, the statistics 
are more difficult to verify. 

Fertility varies greatly from one 
person to another. In many instances, 
the male may be infertile with one 
woman but not with another. Simi¬ 
larly the woman may or may not 
be fertile, depending on the male. Ac¬ 
cordingly fertility must be viewed as 
depending on the reproductive ability 
of both man and woman and not 
on one of them alone. 

The likelihood of giving birth to 
more than one child at a time has 
been estimated as: twins, once in 90 
births; triplets, once in 10,000; quad¬ 
ruplets, once in 750,000; quintuplets, 
once in many million, and the re¬ 
corded birth of sextoplets includes at 
least a few instances which are 
probably authentic. 

By the use of x-rays, a multiple 
birth may be anticipated early enough 
so that proper preparations can be 


made for the arrival of the infants 
Fecundity, incidentally, and this in¬ 
cludes the tendency to multiple birth, 
is apparently a hereditary character¬ 
istic. See also birth, multiple; 

STERILITY, 

FETUS, a term designating the un¬ 
born child in the mother’s womb 
and applied usually from the end of 
the third month of pregnancy untU 
birth. See also pregnancy and pre¬ 
natal CARE. 

FEVER, the abnormal rise in tem¬ 
perature of the human body. Normal 
body temperature is 98.6° F. or 37° 
C. To determine whether or not a 
person has fever and its degree, a 
thermometer is used. Thermometers 
are generally graded from 92° to 108° 
F., but occasionally from 90° to 100°. 
Normal temperature is indicated 
by a tiny red arrow on the ther¬ 
mometer. To measure tempera¬ 
ture, the mercury in the thermometer 
should always be well shaken down 
before the thermometer is used, and 
the thermometer left in the mouth at 
least three minutes. A thermometer 
placed under the arm records about 
one degree lower, and a thermometer 
placed in the rectum about one 
degree higher than one placed in 
the mouth. 

Fever may arise from heat stroke, 
after exposure to great heat, in 
apoplexy, or when inflammation 
occurs in any part of the body. Fever 
may even be the sole manifestation of 
a mental disturbance which in turn 
causes tissue changes that bring about 
an increased temperature. By far the 


369 



FEVEi 


FEVEi 


Eiost common cause of fever, how¬ 
ever, is the invasion of the body by 
germs, a condition known as in¬ 
fectious fever* Poisons produced by 
the invading germs affect the mecha¬ 
nisms which regulate the temperature 
of the healthy body* 

Various acute specific fevers have 
characteristic symptoms and signs, 
peculiar to each, but there are symp¬ 
toms associated with and common to 
all fevers. The person with fever does 
not feel comfortable or well, he may 
shiver severely, and in children there 
may be convulsions. The chills of 
fever are dee to the spasm of the 
Mood vessels in the skin and the 
exclusion of the warm blood that 
comes from deeper in the body. A 
general feeling of soreness in the 
muscles and bones may also ac¬ 
company fever, and the pulse rate is 
almost always increased, except in 
typhoid fever. Generally the rate is 
increased by eight to ten beats for 
each degree of rise of temperature 
and the breathing rate also increases. 
The skin is dry, the urine less in 
quantity and high in color, the tongue 
is coated, the person loses his appetite 
and is thirsty and may be constipated. 
Usually the head aches and delirium 
may ensue. Children sometimes be¬ 
come delirious in slight fever attacks. 

Fever in connection with microbic 
attack is not necessarily detrimental 
and may aid in combatting disease, 
since some microbes cannot live in 
temperatures above the normal body 
temperature. 

Treatment of fever varies with 
type, severity, and the degree of con¬ 
trol which the physician wishes to 


exercise. The diet will include plenty 
of water and as much food as the 
person can digest and enjoy. Food 
serves to reduce the waste of the body 
tissue. Many persons lose weight dur¬ 
ing fever because they feel too ill 
to eat. Fever also causes a definite 
increase in the speed of the chemical 
changes that go on in the body. 
For every rise of one degree in the 
temperature of the body, an increase 
of about 7 per cent in the speed of 
chemical changes occurs. The ac¬ 
celerated body activity indicates that 
a normal, and sometimes above nor¬ 
mal, amount of food should be eaten 
by the person. 

Drugs used to control fever, in¬ 
cluding aspirin, sodium salicylate, 
phenacetin, and acetanilid, should be 
used only when prescribed by a 
doctor and in the amount prescribed. 
Other rules for the home care of 
fever patients include washing the 
patient entirely with warm water, 85° 
or 90° F, or warmer, at least once a 
day, care being taken to avoid un¬ 
necessary exposure. If the patient’s 
temperature rises above 102.5°, he 
can be sponged with tepid or cold 
water. If the temperature continues 
to rise, a wet pack, made with tepid 
or cold water, is often used; and for 
extremely high fevers, an ice pack or 
bath may be required, but should 
only by given under medical super¬ 
vision. In prolonged delirium, a tepid 
or hot pack is sometimes beneficial. 
The patient should have enough sleep* 
In illnesses of short duration, it is 
not desirable to awaken the patient 
to give Mm food. In long fever cases 
it may be necessary, but the advice 


370 



FEVEt BLISTERS 


FiBiOSiTfS 


of the doctor or ourse should be 
sought. See also convulsion: ther¬ 
mometer; TYPHOID FEVER. 

FE¥ER BLISTERS* See herpes 

SIMPLEX. 

FIBRILLATION^ the name of the 
condition io which a miiscle develops 
a slight shivering or tremor. In cer¬ 
tain degenerative diseases^ such as 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, muscles 
fibrillate, but the term is applied 
particularly to auricular fibrillation 
in the heart. Instead of having a 
smooth powerful beat, the heart ac¬ 
tion and pulse become irregular in 
relationship to each other. This 
weakens the force of the pulsation. 
The condition is treated either with 
digitalis or with quinidine. If the 
fibrillation is associated with th 5 rroid 
disease, surgery of the thyroid may 
be indicated to effect a cure. 

Ventricular fibrillation, an extreme 
form, occurs in the ventricles of the 
heart in coronary thrombosis. Since 
little blood, if any, can be poured 
into the aorta from the heart, the 
condition is usually fatal 

FIBRINOGEN DEFICIENCY. Fi¬ 
brinogen is one of the essential blood 
proteins manufactured by the liver. 
In severe liver disturbance this func¬ 
tion may be disordered and restrict 
the clotting abfiity of the blood. 

FIBROMA^ a tumor of fibrous tissue. 
Most fiibromas are benign, as opposed 
to cancerous tumors which are malig¬ 
nant. However, some tumors have 
both fibrous and cancerous tissue and 
are known as mixed tumors. 


riBROSn inflarnmauor ol llbrou^ 

or connectrvc tissue of the 
anywhere in the huc!\ outride of the 
Joints. Muscular rheumatKm is a 
form of fibrositis. rheumatic 

toxins ma}" be responsible for libro- 
sitis, other to\iiis. such as tho'^c from 
septic teeth or throat or freni seme 
other form of infection nidv be the 
onderlying cause. 

The condition is frequent!} relaleil 
to exposure to damp or cold weather, 
and, in the case of middle-aged or 
older persons, to overexertion or 
fatigue. Many people suffer from 
fibrositis after a slight draft or after 
an electric fan has played on a part 
of their body even for a short time. 

Fibrositis in the lumbar region of 
the back may be a form of lumbago. 
Frequently it is involved in cases of 
stiff neck and sometime affects the 
scalp, the buttocks, and less often the 
muscles between the ribs. Occasion¬ 
ally the tendons axe inflamed; and 
the bursas, or fluid-bearing sacs, in 
certain joints may also be affected. 

The most common symptom is 
pain, increasing in intensity and last¬ 
ing from a few days to a few weeks. 
The condition tends to become 
chronic, and is worse after periods 
of inactivity. 

Temporary relief may be obtained 
by moderate exercise or massage. 
Aspirin and other salicylates may be 
beneficial, A combination of heat 
and massage as well as the application 
of liniment is also helpM. 

If fibrositis is accompanied by 
fatigue or exhaustion, an attempt 
should be made to find the specific 


371 



FlLARiASiS 


FILARIASiS 


cause, such as infection, error in diet, 
or undue exposure. People with 
fibrositis should be protected against 
catching cold, chilling, dampness, or 
sudden changes in temperature. Wool 
or a wool mixture should be worn 
next to the skin, and drafts avoided. 

Fibrositis affecting the bursa may 
sometimes be effectively treated by 
x-ray. In other instances anesthetic 
substances injected directly into the 
affected area have been successful. 
See also arthritis; kheumatism. 

FILARIASIS, an infection caused by 
a threadlike worm, filaria, which in¬ 
vades the human body. The female 
filaria gives birth in the human body 
to embryos which migrate through 
the body to the blood vessels and 
skin. From the skin, they are taken 
by blood-sucking flies and mosqui¬ 
toes. In the insect’s body they mature 
and migrate to the salivary glands. 
When the insect bites a person, the 
larvae get into or near the tiny 
wound inflicted by the insect’s bite, 
and eventually penetrate to the in¬ 
terior of the person’s body and travel 
through blood or lymph vessels until 
they find a permanent living site. 

Perhaps the best-known form of 
filariasis is the tropical disease ele¬ 
phantiasis, or, more exactly, Ban¬ 
croft’s filariasis (actually elephantiasis 
refers only to the symptoms), in 
which the legs and other parts of the 
body become grossly swollen. The 
worm lives in the lymph vessels and 
associated tissue in the groin and in 
tissues associated with the external 
genitalia. Inflammation is followed 
by acute pain in these areas, then by 

372 


apparent but temporary recovery. 
The symptoms reappear, alternating 
with the see ming recovery until a 
chronic stage is reached when lymph 
glands and ducts become obstructed 
by the worms, and the more pro¬ 
nounced forms of elephantiasis are 
observed. The larvae or microfilariae 
circulate in the person’s blood at 
night when he is quiet, typically be¬ 
tween midnight and two o’clock, and 
blood samples are taken by the doc¬ 
tor at this time. The larvae leave the 
blood during the active, daytime 
hours. The legs, groin glands, and 
male genitalia swell and the process 
sometimes extends to the interior of 
the body. On the surface of the skin, 
blood circulation is seriously im¬ 
peded, cracking occurs, and finally 
secondary infection by bacteria and 
fungi sets in. 

Satisfactory treatment for this in¬ 
fection was unknown in the past. 
Recent reports, however, describe 
favorable results with naphuride so¬ 
dium and hetrazan. Sulfonamides are 
used against secondary infection and 
surgery for deformities of overgrown 
tissue. Prevention against filariasis 
consists mainly of eliminating the 
mosquito-breeding areas, the use of 
screens, and of DDT to protect per¬ 
sons from the infected mosquitoes. 

Another filarial disease is caused by 
the burrowing migrations below the 
skin of a threadlike worm, the eye 
worm, which is found mostly in 
Africa. This, too, is transmitted by 
insect bite, that of the mango fly. 
The worm leaves an irritated, raised 
serpentine track as it passes on its 
slow way, perhaps an inch a day. It 



FINGEi 


Fits? AID 


typically takes a route almost straight 
across both eyeballs and the bridge 
of the nose, down the temple and 
neck to the other side. Treatment 
consists of removing the worm with 
a hooked needle. The victim usually 
recovers. 

An acute condition, onchocercosis, 
caused by filaria produces tumorous 
growths of coiled worms under the 
skin, sometimes as large as an orange. 
It is found in some parts of Central 
and South America as well as Africa 
The microfilariae of this infection can 
create serious disturbances in the eye 
and sometimes blindness. Surgical re¬ 
moval of the growths and administra¬ 
tion of the drugs used against Ban¬ 
croft’s filariasis are employed against 
this condition. 

FINGER. The human hand termi¬ 
nates in four fingers and a thumb. 
The fingers are known as the fore or 
index, the middle, the ring, and the 
little finger, the first being the most 
mobile and sensitive. The movements 
of the fingers are performed by small 
muscles in the hand, controlled by the 
ulnar nerve which sometimes is para¬ 
lyzed. This results in loss of function 
and inability to spread the fingers. 
The other movements of the hand are 
controlled by the muscles in the fore¬ 
arm which connect with the fingers. 
Sometimes an infection of the little 
finger will result in an abscess in the 
forearm, traveling along the con¬ 
necting sheaths covering the tendons 
in the jflnger, palm, and wrist. 

Various congenital deformities 
affect the fingers: too many fingers, 
too few fingers; adjoining fingers 


united by a thin or e\en ticshv web 
contracted or bent fingers. 

Various distortions of the fingers 
resulting from burns or accidents 
may be successfully treated b\ pldbtic 
surgery. Certain diseases, such 
endocarditis or tuberculosis and other 
lung conditions, may induce clubbed 
fingers which are swollen at the ends 
Arthritis may cause hard oodiiles to 
form, and deposits at the joints iTid\ 
result from gout. 

FINGERNAILS. nails. 

FIRST AID, emergency treatment 
given in case of accident or sudden 
illness. It is necessary’ on innumera¬ 
ble occasions. Certain principles of 
first aid should be known to every¬ 
one, since immediate treatment be¬ 
fore a doctor arrives may prevent 
more serious developments or even 
save lives. 

Here are a few suggestions on what 
to do in an emergency situatioii: 

1. Give a stricken person space— 
people have a tendency to crowd 
around the victim. Be sure he has 
air so that he can breathe freely. 

2. Don’t try to make someone who 
has fallen sit or stand. The effort to 
stand or sit may cause grave injury. 
Do not move the person; a bone 
may be broken. If the person must be 
moved, splints should be improvised 
and applied beforehand. 

3. In case of bleeding, try to find 
the source. Merely placing a thumb 
on a bleeding cut and keeping it there 
has saved lives. Never give alcohol 
to a person who is bleeding externally 
or intemally; it will only increase 
the bleeding. 


373 



FISH 


FISSURE 


4. Whea a person has fainted, 
keep his head below the level of the 
rest of the body so that the blood will 
flow more easily to the head. Loosen 
clothing about the neck and chest. 

5. Since most accidents involve 
shock, the victim should be kept 
warm with extra clothing or blankets. 
A light massage of the limbs may be 
helpful. 

A doctor should of course be sum¬ 
moned unless you are absolutely sure 
that the injury is slight. 

Every home should have a really 
adequate first-aid outfit. It should 
include the following items kept in 
their original containers in a tightly 
shut tin box: 1 yard of 2" gauze; 
yard oiled silk; absorbent cotton; 
2 triangular bandages; finger band¬ 
ages; and clean scissors. 

Also essential in the home is a 
properly supplied medicine chest 
which should include: 1 ounce bottle 
tincture of iodine; 1 ounce boric acid 
powder; aromatic spirits of ammonia; 
1 ounce epsom salts; enema syringe; 
and clean scissors. See also acci¬ 
dents; MEDICINE chest; POISONING; 
resuscitation; shock. 

FISH. Many persons in the United 
States believe that a diet of fish is 
not as nutritious as one of meat. 
However, entire nations subsist 
largely on fish and thrive on it. 

The protein content of most of 
the fish most commonly eaten, such 
as halibut, cod, whitefish, salmon, 
trout, pickerel, and perch, averages 
from 15 to 18 per cent as contrasted 
with approximately 21 per cent for 
mutton, beefsteak, and pork. 


The flesh of fish generally contains, 
in addition to protein, fat, mineral 
salt, particularly iodine and phos¬ 
phorus, and vitamins. It is especially 
valuable as a source of vitamin A and 
vitamin D which is significant in re¬ 
lation to the use of calcium and phos¬ 
phorus by the body. Cod liver oil and 
other fish liver oils, notably halibut 
and salmon, are also rich in vitamins 
A and D. Fish roe contains vitamins 
B and E as well. Most of the fat in 
the flesh of fish is stored in the liver, 
except for salmon, mackerel, sar¬ 
dines, and herring which have about 
10 to 15 per cent in the flesh. Studies 
of the vitamin content of various 
edible parts of fish indicate that oys¬ 
ters give the most complete vitamin 
value, followed closely by salmon 
and herring. Fish, while rich in all 
these things, lack calcium. 

FISSURE, a division or groove be¬ 
tween adjoining parts of similar 
substance. The brain contains many 
fissures. The term is also properly 
applied to certain narrow abnormal 
pathways, such as those which occur 
in the nipple or anus. 

A fissure of the nipple is seen most 
frequently when the mother is nurs¬ 
ing and is commonly due to lack of 
care, though a certain stiffness of the 
skin over the nipple may accentuate 
the breaking of the skin. To avoid 
this type of fissure, the mother should 
wash and dry the nipple with care 
after every feeding. Any rigidity of 
the skin in this area can be prevented 
or reduced if an appropriate ointment 
is applied. 

The presence of an anal fissure is 


374 



FiSTULA 


FITS 


usually accompanied by severe pain 
when making a movement and often 
reaches down Into the thighs. Blood 
or pus or both may also be seen in 
the stool. An anal fissure ordinarily 
occurs at the lower end of the bowel 
and probably near the rear. A hemor- 
roid is often seen w here it reaches the 
anal opening. 

The pain of an anal fissure may be 
somewhat relieved if the person will 
take laxatives as needed to soften his 
bowel movement. The surface should 
then be cleansed with soft paper or 
cloth, and the anus and adjoining 
parts should be washed after every 
movement. After the area is dried, 
a soothing ointment is beneficial. 
Most physicians are convinced that 
surgery is the only successful treat¬ 
ment for anal fissure. See also anus; 

HEMORRHOIDS. 

FISTULA, an abnormal narrow pas¬ 
sage which leads from some cavity 
of the body to the outside skin and 
which may coimect one cavity with 
another. Such an opening if not a 
narrow passage is not, strictly speak¬ 
ing, a fistula. Nevertheless, it may 
properly be described as fistulous. 

A fistula present at birth indicates 
that some passageway, normal while 
the infant was in the womb, failed to 
close after birth as it should have 
done. Sometimes a child is bom with 
an aperture at the navel through 
which urine escapes. Similarly this 
opening, normal in the fetus, ordi- 


corteurs of "orrc body An 

ana! fistula often originites ira this 
manner. Two types of ana'* h-fiiLe 
are the complete, which orens tro-r 
the rectum and tra\et» outside the 
bowel to the skin, usually terminating 
close to the anus; and the iricomplete, 
so-called because It lacks cither the 
surface or the rectal opening. 

The incomplete anal fistula may 
also lead from the surface to some 
abscess which is created and occupied 
by germs which have seeped through 
the wall of the bowel. Early treat¬ 
ment of such an abscess may avoid ’ 
the development of a fistula. How¬ 
ever, if the fistula already exists it 
will drain perristently to the surface. 
The patient will not suffer pain unless 
the passage becomes clogged. How¬ 
ever, at the point where the fistula 
reaches the skin he may experience 
discomfort and itching. 

Another common type of fistula 
travels from the wall of the stomach 
to an abscess near the appendix, and 
still another is the vaginal fistula. 
If the lining of the vagina has been 
damaged in childbirth, this type of 
fistula may arise between the vagina 
and bladder or between the vagina 
and rectum. A fistula may also arise 
from either one of the parotid glands, 
which are under fibe ears, and move 
to a point where it enters the cheek. 
This is known as a salivary fistula. 

If a fistula persists beyond the earl; 
stages, surgery is the only cure. 

jp-wnmrt rarsfl.. .. .^. j. "jf. .e . 







FLATFOOT 


FLATULENCE 


nate an attack of convulsions. Fits 
are associated not only with epilepsy 
but may also occur in connection 
with asphyxia, poisoning, lockjaw, hy¬ 
drophobia, apoplexy, meningitis and 
in slow-pulse diseases such as anemia 
of the brain. They may also appear, 
together with subsequent coma, as 
a disturbance of late pregnancy. The 
type of fit known as infantile convul¬ 
sions may sometimes be a reflex ac¬ 
tion associated with teething, worms, 
rickets, fever or diarrhea. 

Hysterical fits are of special in¬ 
terest because they do not involve 
such symptoms as loss of conscious¬ 
ness or incapacity to control the blad¬ 
der or bowels. Usually they occur to 
a person in the company of others, 
which seems to indicate that the 
victim is subconsciously trying to gain 
attention. Though hysterical fits are 
seldom physically dangerous, they do 
indicate a tense emotional conflict 
which may require the attention of a 
psychiatrist. 

Regardless of the cause, the first 
step in giving relief to a convulsive 
patient, while awaiting the doctor, is 
to place him on his back. It is neces¬ 
sary to prevent him from doing harm 
to himself but use of force should be 
kept to a minimum. A piece of wood 
should be wrapped in a handkerchief 
and placed between the teeth so that 
he will not bite his tongue. His 
clothes should be loosened, especially 
around the neck and across the chest. 
If he vomits, he should be placed on 
his side. Gradually as the person re¬ 
covers, every effort should be made to 
communicate with him and to reas¬ 
sure him. The patient is only half 

376 


conscious at this stage, however, and 
must be treated with caution since he 
might suddenly become physically 
dangerous. See epilepsy; eclampsia; 

CONVULSIONS. 

FLATFOOT, a common foot dis¬ 
order which may be the result of an 
occupation that requires long periods 
of standing or walking, overweight, 
disease, injury, or paralysis. The con¬ 
dition may be based on weakness of 
the foot arch that is inborn, or it may 
be acquired through overstrain and 
poor position. Poorly, fitting shoes 
may also promote the sagging of the 
arch. These faults which do not seem 
great nevertheless cause the ligaments 
to stretch, relax, and become incapa¬ 
ble of returning to their original 
flexibility. The bones are then affected 
and the arch flattens, and soreness, 
pain, and fatigue result. 

If some flexibility is retained, much 
may be done by proper shoes, arch 
supports, pads, manipulation, train¬ 
ing, and by exercise to strengthen the 
muscles and other parts of the foot. 
AU of these exercises and the course 
of treatment should be under the 
supervision of a foot specialist since 
slight variations of adjustment are 
sometimes notably effective. Even 
surgery may be necessary to break up 
the fibrous adhesions which form in 
rigidly flat feet. See also arches, 
fallen; feet. 

FLATULENCE, an excess of air or 
gas in the stomach or intestines or in 
both. Often painful, this accumulation 
of air may adversely affect breathing, 
as well as the normal action of the 
heart. 



FLU 


FOOD, BASIC REQUIREMENTS 


Flatulence can be caused occa¬ 
sionally by fermentation in the stom¬ 
ach, or more often by eating of cer¬ 
tain types of food such as beans. 
Most frequently it results from swal¬ 
lowing air while eating or drinking. 

Drugs taken for relief of flatulence 
are carminatives. Ordinarily their ac¬ 
tive component is peppermint, ginger, 
dill, or anise. Any of these serve not 
only to expel the accumulated air but 
also to soothe the stomach ache as¬ 
sociated with flatulence. 

To avoid swallowing air, chew food 
with closed lips. This is most effec¬ 
tive when peace and harmony are 
encouraged during eating. See also 

INDIGESTION. 

FLU. See influenza. 

FLUORIDATION, the addition of 
chemical salts, fluorides, to the water 
supply. It has been carried out in 
many communities in an effort to re¬ 
duce dental decay. Fluorine is a 
chemical element found in the enamel 
of teeth, bones, and in minute quan¬ 
tities in other body tissues. Experi¬ 
ments with school children, each one 
receiving a regular intake of one part 
per millio n of flourides in drinking 
water, have established that there is a 
definite reduction in dental decay 
when water is fluorinated. 

FLUOROSCOPY, the act of using a 
fluoroscope; of observing, on a spe¬ 
cially coated screen, the shadows of 
objects which are being x-rayed. This 
diagnostic technique has the advan¬ 
tage of offering a moving picture 
rather than a static photograph. The 
intestines may be examined in action. 


or the setting of a fractured bone can 
actually be followed with the eyes. 
The disadvantage of the fluoroscope 
is the fact that the image is less 
precise than that of a photograph. 
Great skill is therefore essential in 
the interpretation. See also x-RA'is. 

FOOD ALLERGY, a disturbance af¬ 
fecting people who are sensitive to 
one or more particular foods. When 
eaten, such foods cause symptoms of 
irritation of the stomach and bow'eis, 
and often a skin rash such as hives, 
erythema, eczema, or perhaps asth¬ 
matic symptoms. 

White of egg is a frequent cause of 
such allergy, as are fish, cheese, to¬ 
matoes, pork, shellfish, and other 
foods. The protein contained in them 
is most often responsible. 

Food allergies in infants generally 
result in eczema or diarrhea and 
may be caused by egg white, milk, or 
cereals. The symptoms usually ap¬ 
pear the first time the infant is fed 
these foods, and ordinarily disappear 
by the end of the second year. In 
children, sensitivity to eggs, wheat, 
and milk occurs less frequently as 
the child grows older and should dis¬ 
appear between the ages of four and 
twelve. The symptoms are dry and 
itchy skin eruptions. Scratching 
causes thickening and intensified itch¬ 
ing, and broken skin. Because of the 
danger of iufection, childhood ec¬ 
zema should be carefully watched. 
See also allergy; eczema. 

FOOD, BASIC REQUIREMENTS. 
The human body grows from ap¬ 
proximately seven pounds at birth 
to many times that weight in ma- 

377 



FOOD AND NUTRITION BOARD, NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL 



0-12 36 (79) 144(57) 2300 70 1:2 12 4500 

i3-15 49(108) 160(63) 2500 80 1.3 15 5000 

16-20 54(120) 162(64) 2400 75 13 15 5000 












































FOOD FATS 


FOOD FATS 


turity. Then, after full grouth is at¬ 
tained, the body must maintain it¬ 
self by a process of constant re¬ 
placement for the duration of life 
The body constantly replaces itself 
with new cells and destroys the old 
ones. 

The body requires cextam con¬ 
ditions to carry on this process of 
growth and replacement. 

Quantity of food. Food energy 
IS measured m calories. One calorie 
IS the amount of heat needed to 
raise the temperature of a liter ot 
water from 15° to 16® C. By know¬ 
ing the number of calories in a par¬ 
ticular food the amount of energy 
contained in any quantity of that 
food can be calculated. This tells 
how much energy the body will be 
able to get from that food. (Calories 
are measured by actually placing 
the food to be tested in a miniature 
furnace and accurately measuring 
the energy released as heat. In the 
human body foods are burned by a 
process of chemical digestion; but 
the amount of energy released by 
any food when used by the body is 
almost exactly the same as the 
amount of energy released when the 
same food is burned in the testing 
furnace.) 

Different foods contain diiEferent 
amounts of calories (energy). Fat 
foods are fattening because a piece 
of fat contains more than twice as 
many calories as a piece of protein 
or carbohydrate of the same weight. 
An ounce of pure fat provides 288 
calories, while an equal amount of 


protein or carbohydrate ^^ouA gi\e 

only 128 calorie^- 

The number oi calories wluch the 
human body needs depends upon 
the person's ueight, his age fgrowth 
rateh the climate m which he Ines 
and the amount ot ph\sical 
he IS engaged m An adult requires 
13 calories for each pound ol body 
weight just to keep the body ali\e 
for twenty-four hourS'—-the wear 
and tear of destroying and rebuild¬ 
ing body tissue An intant requires 
three to four times that number ot 
calories, and a growing child about 
twice—or 26 calories—per pound of 
body w eight to buiid the new 
muscle, bone, and skin which make 
the body grow' larger. The person 
who performs hard physical labor 
needs more calories than someone 
whose work keeps him sitting at a 
desk all day. Heavier people (larger 
bodies) require more food than 
lighter people. Hot weather de¬ 
creases and cold weather increases 
the calories required. An additional 
iO per cent of the total calories 
needed are used for digestion ot 
food. In the last three months of 
pregnancy an extra 450 calories per 
day should be added to the diet, and 
during lactation a woman who is 
nursing her baby needs an extra 
1000 calories daily. The accom¬ 
panying table will assist in calculat¬ 
ing just how much food (how many 
calories) is required at any given 
time. See also nutrition. 

FOOD FAm Fat is a white or yeh 


379 



FOOD POISONING 


FOOD POISONING 


iow substance, greasy to the touch, 
found in both animals and plants. 
When pure, fat has no odor, t^te, 
or color. It exists both as a liquid and 
as a solid and may be dissolved in 
chloroform, ether, or benzene, but 
not in water or cold alcohol. 

As a food, fat is valuable primarily 
as fuel, a source of energy. The most 
concentrated food we have, it pos¬ 
sesses more than twice the caloric 
value of carbohydrates. Every ounce 
of fat has the same value as every 
other, whether it be an ounce of 
butter or an ounce of cottonseed oil. 
One type of fat, however, may be 
more accessible than another. In the 
United States, fats are consumed most 
frequently in the form of eggs, butter, 
margarine, cream, meat, olive oil, 
vegetable oil, and nuts. See also 

NUTKITION. 

FOOD POISONING, an illness due 
to disease-causing organisms or harm¬ 
ful foreign substances, such as 
chemicals, in food. Misconceptions 
and confusion are common regard¬ 
ing food poisoning. For example, 
there is actually no such illness as 
“ptomaine poisoning.” Ptomaines are 
products of putrefactive organisms 
which, because they were toxic to 
experimental animals when given by 
injection, were long considered re¬ 
sponsible for the effects of food poi¬ 
soning. Later studies established that 
ptomaines axe destroyed in the hu¬ 
man digestive process and almost cer¬ 
tainly do not have any coimection 
with the symptoms of food poisoning. 

Disease-causing bacteria are the 
commonest source of food poisoning, 


the most frequent probably being the 
staphylococcus. The same type of 
bacteria is responsible for many local 
infections of the skin involving ab¬ 
scesses and formation of pus. Per¬ 
haps the most severe type of food 
poisoning from bacteria is botulism, 
which occurs much less frequently 
than staphylococcal poisoning. As 
with botulism, poisoning by staphy¬ 
lococci is actually the effect of a 
toxin produced by the organisms. 
Probably everyone is affected by it at 
some time or other. Possibly what 
was once called ptomaine poisoning 
was actually caused by staphylococci. 
Putrefaction by itself, the process 
carried on by the organisms which 
produce ptomaines, is not harmful. 
Limburger cheese and other putrefied 
foods are safely consumed. Such 
foods will, of course, become poison¬ 
ous just as other foods, if and when 
poisonous substances or organisms 
enter them. 

Although not aU staphylococci pro¬ 
duce a substance toxic to human 
beings when ingested, those that are 
involved in boils and abscesses do, 
and such an infection on the hands or 
arms of a person preparing food can 
be a source of poisoning to many 
people. Cream and similar foods like 
custard and ice cream, Cheddar 
cheese, potato salad, many kinds of 
sauces and prepared meats are espe¬ 
cially susceptible mediums for these 
organisms. The poison itself is heat- 
resistant, but whereas botulinus toxin 
is ineffective if boiled for a few min¬ 
utes the staphylococci toxin retains 
its potency even after half an hour’s 
boiling. 


380 



FOOT-AMD«MOyiH DISEASE 

Staphylococci are found in the hu¬ 
man nose and throat under ordinary 
conditions^ although they are nor¬ 
mally kept in check by natural bal¬ 
ances. Another organism responsible 
for food poisoning is a type of bac¬ 
teria called salmonella. Its effects 
may be more severe than those of the 
staphylococci, and salmonella out¬ 
breaks have occurred in which 10 per 
cent of those stricken died. This, 
however, is extreme and the usual 
fatality rate is about 1 per cent, 

A few varieties of mushrooms may 
prove fatal if eaten. Mussel poison¬ 
ing has been traced to a protozoan, a 
one-celled microscopic organism, 
toxic to human beings, which is 
sometimes eaten by the mussel. 
Cadmium poisoning may occur when 
acid food is consumed which has 
been left in cadmium-plated con¬ 
tainers, such as ice trays. 

Food poisoning manifests its symp¬ 
toms within six hours after consump¬ 
tion of the poison-containing food. 
Symptoms are similar to those often 
present in intestinal disturbances, 
nausea, cramps, diarrhea, vomiting, 
and frequently headaches and sweat¬ 
ing. Fatalities are rare. The acute 
symptoms tend to abate after five or 
six hours. Prostration may occur, 
generally due to loss of body fluids. 
The physician usually prescribes rem¬ 
edies directed more toward ridding 
the body of the poison rather than 
merely relieving the symptoms. Re¬ 
moval of the infectious or poisonous 
matter from the stomach is probably 
necessary unless it has already been 
evacuated by natural processes. Water 
and salt in the appropriate form is ad- 


FRACTUiES 

ministered to o\ercome the depietiofi 
of both, and geneial exhaustion 
treated Vrith drugs which aid circiila- 
tion and heart fimctjon. See aho 
botulism; mushroom poisoning; 

POISONTNG. 

FOOT-AND-MOUTH DISEASE, an 
acute febnle (fe\er| disease, charac¬ 
terized by an eruption of blisters 
about either or both the feet and 
mouth. It affects chiefly cattle and 
other animals with cloven hoofs. The 
disease is contagious, involving a 
vims which may be spread by the in¬ 
fected animal, or, indirectly, through 
contact with the animaFs straw or 
milk. 

This affliction seldom attacks man. 
When it does, symptoms do not ap¬ 
pear before three to five days after 
exposure. Fever and headache are 
followed by the appearance of char¬ 
acteristic blisters. In man, these ap¬ 
pear on the hands, as well as on the 
feet and mouth. Treatment of human 
beings is primarily concerned with 
reducing the fever and applying anti¬ 
septics to the blisters and to the open 
sores which appear when the blisters 
break. Since foot-and-mouth disease 
is contagious, the patient, man or 
animal, should be isolated until a 
physician can be consulted. 

FRACTURES. Breaking of a bone or 
cartilage is a fracture. Fractures may 
be classified by the type of bone or 
the type of break. If a broken bone 
penetrates the skin, the condition is 
a compound or open fracture. If it 
does not penetrate the skin, it is a 
simple fracture. Careless handling of 
an injured person may change a 


381 



FRECKLES 


FRIEDREICH'S ATAXIA 


simple fracture to a compound one. 
For this reason, the patient should 
never be moved until a physician has 
advised it, unless absolutely essential. 

Some fractures have descriptive 
names, such as a march fracture, 
which involves the breaking of a 
small bone in the foot, a type of frac¬ 
ture which a soldier on a long march 
could sustain. A greenstick or hickory 
stick fracture occurs when one side 
of the bone is broken and the other 
side only bent. 

A broken bone will not always be 
evident to an untrained person. A 
fracture may exist even though the 
victim is capable of moving the in¬ 
jured part. Anyone who has suffered 
a fall or injury with ensuing discom¬ 
fort should seek medical advice 
promptly. See also bones; ribs; 
skull; spinal fracture. 

FRECKLES, are harmless small 
brown pigmented spots or blemishes 
on the skin, caused by exposure to 
the sun’s rays or to ultraviolet light 
from artificial sources. They are 
formed by the cells of the skin as a 
protection against further action of 
ultraviolet rays. People with red or 
blonde hair and light skin are more 
prone to freckles than those whose 
skins bronze under the sun. 

Freckles appear about the seventh 
or eighth year and remain for life, 
receding in winter and reappearing in 
spring and summer. If the skin is 
shaded from the sun their appearance 
will be retarded. 

Ointments for the skin which 
screen off the ultraviolet rays of the 
sun and prevent freckles from appear¬ 

382 


ing are available, as are cosmetics 
that conceal freckles. Freckles may 
be removed with ointments contain¬ 
ing skin-peeling properties. However, 
these ointments include substances 
that are poisonous and may cause 
dangerous irritation to the skin. Such 
preparations should not be used, espe¬ 
cially on children. Freckles may be 
removed with these preparations, but 
they cannot be prevented from recur¬ 
ring. 

FRIEDREICH’S ATAXIA, a rare 
hereditary nervous disorder which 
may affect several members of a 
family. The difficulty usually appears 
in childhood or early youth with a 
lack of muscular coordination begm- 
ning in the legs and gradually involv¬ 
ing the whole body. 

The gait becomes shambling, al¬ 
most drunken, the feet deformed as 
in claw foot. The cMld will walk with 
the heel raised, and on the outer side 
of the foot. The speech is also im¬ 
paired and curvature of the spine to 
one side is noticeable. Paralysis of 
the whole leg muscle may follow 
eventually, and the victim may never 
be able to walk. 

The disease is caused by imperfect 
development of bundles of nerve 
fibers in the spinal cord, and so far 
a cure is not known. However, at¬ 
tempts should be made to prevent 
tightening of the muscles. 

Although there may be a gradual 
hunching position, disturbance of 
sensation or wastage of the muscles 
does not occur apart from that due 
to the action of the disease. Death 
comes not from the disease itself but 
from pneumonia or other infections. 



FiOEHLICH^S SYNDROME 


FiOSTBilE 


FROEHOCH’S SYNUMOME, 
named after the scientist who first 
described is a disturbance of the 
glandular system in which sexual 
organs remain infantile. The disease 
is rare. 

If the disease occurs in early child- 
hood, it causes dwarfism, but if it 
appears in children before puberty, 
the boy or girl will be fat. The victim 
will be lazy mentally and have a 
voracious appetite for food. The 
sexual organs will be undeveloped. 
Most fat children do not suffer from 
this condition, and are more likely to 
be obese because of bad dietary 
habits. 

The adult male becomes effemi¬ 
nate, his skin is soft, and the distri¬ 
bution of flesh around the thighs and 
breasts has a woman’s appearance. 
Female patients become exceedingly 
fat, sometimes weighing as much as 
300 pounds. 

Modem hormone therapy can re¬ 
lieve many of the symptoms if the 
disease has not progressed beyond 
control. Treatment includes medical 
care and administration of hormones, 
such as pituitary extract. Proper 
therapy will reduce excessive weight, 
correct deformity, and restore sexual 
development. 

FROSTBITE, a condition caused by 
exposure to extreme cold or cold and 
wind. The toes, fingers, ears, and tip 
of the nose are usually the first parts 
of the body to be affected. The frost¬ 
bitten areas turn pale, the blood and 
moisture in the tissues freeze, and the 
circulation is cut off. Frostbite is 
dangerously deceptive since there is 


no feeling of pain and the victim is 
usually unaware of what is happen¬ 
ing. 

The old theory that a frostbitten 
area should be rubbed with snow or 
ice is completely false; such a pro¬ 
cedure can actually cause harm. The 
best rules to follow in cases of frost¬ 
bite are simple: warm the affected 
area slowly by immersing it in tepid 
water or bundling it up in woolen 
cloth. Warming too fast produces 
severe pain. Do not under any cir¬ 
cumstances rub the frostbitten area 
as the friction can break down the 
cell structure of the tissue. If the 
skin is warmed immediately the color 
will usually return. However, if the 
frostbite is severe, the area wiU re¬ 
main white, indicating that the cold 
has contracted the blood vessels to 
such an extent that normal blood cir¬ 
culation cannot immediately be re¬ 
sumed. A doctor should be called 
immediately. In time the blood will 
seep back into the tissues, and the 
affected area will appear purplish 
or black. In a day or two, these areas 
may become acutely inflamed and 
painful from the pressure of fluids in 
the skin coming through the lower 
layers, and blisters, characteristic of 
frostbite, will appear. The blisters 
may leave ulcers on mptaring, and 
the affected tissues may die. Blisters 
should be treated with ointments after 
being opened, and then covered with 
dry sterEe dressings. In severe cases 
of frostbite, the tissues may be irrep¬ 
arably damaged and gangrene result. 
Amputation of a toe, finger, or entire 
limb has been known to be necessary 
in such cases. 


383 



FUMIGATION 


FUNGUS 


lo pre\ent frostbite, outdoor ac¬ 
tivity should be postponed or limited 
when the temperature is below 8°, 
particularly when there is a strong 
wind. If the temperature is between 
8® and 15°, some danger of frost¬ 
bite exists. Clothing should be warm, 
wind-resistant, and properly fitted. 
Tight shoes, socks, and gloves re¬ 
strict circulation and encourage frost¬ 
bite. People who must work outdoors 
during extremely cold weather should 
not stay out longer than two hours at 
a time without intervening rest peri¬ 
ods of half an hour. People with 
diabetes or any form of heart or 
circulatory disease are especially sus¬ 
ceptible to serious damage from frost¬ 
bite. See also chilblains; gangrene; 

SKIN. 

FUMIGATION. Fumigation is done 
with disinfectants which employ 
smoke or fumes. The method is used, 
for example, against domestic insects 
or as a means of cleansing the sick¬ 
room of a patient who has suffered 
from an infectious disease. 

When a room is to be fumigated, 
any metallic articles present must be 
washed with a disinfectant and re¬ 
moved. Likewise cupboard doors 
must be opened and aH drawers 
pulled out. The window sashes should 
be sealed with gummed paper, and 
if the room contains a fireplace, the 
chimney should be stuffed with news¬ 
papers. Finally, after igniting the dis¬ 
infectant, the doors ought to be 
sealed with gummed paper from the 
outside. 

For general purposes, the best 


fumigant is sulphur. This is not effec¬ 
tive, however, unless moisture is 
present. Therefore, before fumigating 
is begun, the walls, ceiling, and floor 
and also the furniture should be 
sprinkled with water. The next step 
is to fill a large basin partly with 
water and place it on a table in the 
center of the room. The sulphur, in 
a small bowl, is then set in this 
larger basin. The sulphur may be 
either in the form of candles or roll 
sulphur. Roll sulphur to be inflam¬ 
mable must be moistened with wood 
alcohol. 

A more recent type of fumigant, 
and in some ways a more effective 
one, is the freon bomb which was 
first used by the armed forces in 
World War II. This contains an in¬ 
secticide, such as pyrethrum or DDT. 
Immediately upon being opened, this 
fumigant penetrates effectively to 
every comer of the room. 

Approximately twenty-four hours 
after fumigation, the doors and win¬ 
dows can be opened wide and the 
room aired for a day or more. The 
wallpaper, if any, may be removed 
at this time and burned, and it is 
also advisable to limewash the ceil¬ 
ing and to scrub the floor, the wood¬ 
work, and the furniture with soap 
and water. See also bedbug; disin¬ 
fection; VENTILATION. 

FUNGUS, a low form of plant life. 
Fungi, a widespread group of simple 
plants commonly known as mush¬ 
rooms, molds, and yeasts, do not 
have any chlorophyll of their own 
and depend upon green plants or 


384 



FURUNCLES 


FURUNCLES 


other organisms for their food 
sources. Fungi which invade another 
living organism and obtain their food 
at the expense of this organism are 
parasites. Fungi which live on dead 
or decaying organisms are sapro¬ 
phytes. They flourish in the soil and 
in all sorts of warm damp places 
where they hatch and develop pro- 
lifically. 

Some fungi are many-celled and 
reproduce by spore formation, each 
spore being capable of forming a new 
plantlike growth similar to the parent 
plant. Others, like the yeasts, are 
unicellular and reproduce by budding. 
The buds break off and form new 
cells. 

Thousands of varieties of molds 
have been isolated and identified. 
Most of them are quite harmless to 
man and in some cases are highly 
beneficial. Some varieties are used as 
the source of the antibiotics which 
have saved coimtless thousands of 
lives since the development of peni¬ 
cillin during World War 11. Many 
fungi constitute a serious threat to 
mankind. 

Disease-bearing molds are most 
prevalent in the soil, although they 
have also been foimd in such diverse 
sites as unpasteurized milk, cellars, 
animal excrement, cattle, and even in 
some conununity water supplies. 
Dangerous or undesirable fungi some¬ 
times infest plant crops raised for 
food, causing potato blight and wheat 
rust. Some initiate and intensify cer¬ 
tain t3^es of asthma or hay fever; 
others cause the fungus or mycotic 
diseases which are quite common in 


human beings as well as in man> 
domestic animals. These infections 
may be superficial, affecting only the 
skin, hair, and teeth, as in ringworm 
of the scalp, feet, and nails. More 
invasive fungi penetrate the tissues of 
internal structure and produce serious 
diseases of the mucous membranes, 
heart, lungs, and other organs. 
Among the more prevalent of these 
infections are actinomycosis, blasto¬ 
mycosis, histoplasmosis, coccidioido¬ 
mycosis, moniliasis, and sporotricho¬ 
sis, all found throughout the south 
and southeastern United States and in 
scattered areas throughout the world. 
Maduromycosis, a disease affecting 
the feet, occurs chiefly in tropical 
countries. See also antibiotics; and 
names of specific fungus diseases. 

FURUNCLES. A furuncle, or boil, 
is a painful, pus-producing inflamma¬ 
tion of the skin, with a central core, 
caused ordinarily by certain types of 
bacteria which enter the skin through 
hair follicles or sweat glands. Usually 
such an infection does not occur un¬ 
less resistance has been weakened by 
diabetes, Bright’s disease, or a fever. 
Likewise anyone suffering from un¬ 
dernourishment, fatigue, or constipa¬ 
tion is vulnerable. The skin may also 
be weakened by local irritation, such 
as the persistent rubbing of a 
starched collar on the neck. 

Boils in the vicinity of the nose or 
in the ear should be examined 
promptly by a doctor. Others, unless 
they get large, may be permitted to 
follow their own course. Larger boils 
may be painful and often require 


385 



FURUNCLES 


FURUNCLES 


surgery. An appropriate antiseptic times administer sulfonamides, peni- 
may be applied to the general area to cillin, or other antibiotics, x-rays 
prevent the infection from spreading and ultraviolet rays, as well as vac- 
and creating another set of boils. cines and similar preparations, have 
When the entire body is afiBicted also been used with success against 
with boils, a physician will some- persistent boils. See also carbuncles. 


386 





GAITj a characteristic manner of 
walking. Certain diseases are associ¬ 
ated with a characteristic gait. Coor¬ 
dination between the two feet may be 
distorted—for example, by a degen¬ 
erative disease of the spinal cord 
known as locomotor ataxia. The vic¬ 
tim of this disease will lift each foot 
abruptly and higher than necessary, 
after which he pushes it forward 
and lowers it with a sudden thump. 
At the same time, he seems com¬ 
pelled to lean out and observe these 
movements, in order to finish them. 

Another disease of the spinal cord, 
involving the lateral columns of the 
cord, produces a wooden gait in 
which the feet are pulled across the 
ground. This often involves a kind 
of crisscrossing of the feet, as they 
are dragged forward. 

Several other types of paralysis 
have special effects on the manner of 
walking. When certain muscles of the 
leg are paralyzed, for example, a 
kind of drooping of the foot results. 
To prevent his toes from dragging on 


the ground, the person lifts his foot 
high in the air before every forward 
movement. Again, paralysis on one 
side may necessitate twisting the en¬ 
tire body so that the leg on the oppo¬ 
site side can be swung around before 
it advances. In paralysis agitans, the 
person seems to hustle and shuffle as 
if being shoved from behind. At the 
same time the body careens forward 
in advance of the feet, as if the per¬ 
son were attempting to avoid falling 
on his face. In muscular or pseudo- 
hypertrophic paralysis, growth occurs 
in the calf of the leg. Although the 
muscles become enlarged, they are 
weak. The result is a waddling gait, 
resembling that of a pregnant woman. 

The best known of aU abnormai 
gaits, the limp, is often caused by 
stiff muscles, localized pain, or a dif¬ 
ference between the length of the 
two legs. See also ataxia; paxatysis. 

GATJLBLADDERs a baglike, pear- 
shaped sac lying usually on the un¬ 
derside of the liver. It stores bile 


387 



GALLBLADDER 


GALLBLADDER 


which is a primary digestive sub¬ 
stance that the liver produces al¬ 
most continuously. Bile flows to the 
gallbladder from the li\er, and there 
is condensed by tne extraction of 
water. When food is eaten and diges¬ 
tion occurs, bile enters the duodenum 
from the gallbladder. Bile is alkaline 



GallWodiier — The gallbladder lies under 
the liver in fhe righf upper abdomen. With 
disease if may enlarge enough so that it 
can be touched quite easily during physical 
examination. Occasionally the sac is so 
large if may extend to the right lower 
abdomen. The gallbladder stores the bile 
It receives from the liver. A tube, the hepatic 
duct^ transports the bile to the gallbladder 
and fhe common bile duct conveys the bile 
from the gallbladder to the Intestines. Bile, 
a necessory fliiid for proper digestion in 
the intestines, varies in color from brown to 
greenish yellow. 


and neutralizes the acid semidigested 
food coming from the stomach. 

The gallbladder is susceptible to 
infection and to obstructions in the 
tubes carrying bile^ particularly by 
the formation of stones. The probable 
cause of gallstones is interruption of 
the bile flow by infections and diges¬ 
tive changes. Gallstones may range 
in size from that of a poppy seed to 
that of an egg. The stones will float 
in water and are soaplike to the 
touch. They consist largely of choles¬ 
terol, a fatlike substance found in the 
blood and other parts of the body, 
and of bile pigments. These are de¬ 
rived from the bile itself, but the 
nucleus around which they coalesce 
seems to be a foreign substance, such 
as a small cluster of bacteria or of 
infected discharge. Approximately 5 
to 10 per cent of all adults have gall¬ 
stones, and they occur in women five 
times oftener than in men. 

Gallstones are not always trouble¬ 
some, but they may block a gall duct 
and induce an attack of gallstone or 
biliary colic without warning. The 
pit of the stomach is seized with pain 
which may be agonizing and so se¬ 
vere that the patient collapses. Such 
attacks are likely to be accompanied 
by vomiting and fever, and usually 
end when the stone slips back into 
the gallbladder or proceeds into the 
intestine whence it is excreted with 
the solid wastes. Another attack may 
not occur for months or years. When 
the colic symptoms are repeated, the 
stomach feels full, pains are felt 
after eating fatty foods, and gas is 
present. 

Removal of the gallbladder is ad- 


388 



GALLBLADDER 


GALLBLADDER 



Gcstibiadder — The gallbladder and surrounding areas are visualized by X-ray after the 
administration of a radiopaque substance into the body. The substance goes into the liver 
and then into the gallbladder. The gallbladder is clearly defined and appears fo be normal. 
Tube-like structures leading into and away from the gallbladder are definitely outlined. This 
technique aids in detecting a defect or disease in the gallbladder and tubes. 


visable if the person suffers from too 
frequent attacks of gallbladder colic. 
Not only is ordinary comfort re¬ 
stored, but certain definite risks are 
thus avoided. Infection, with danger¬ 
ous formation of pus, or cancer may 
develop if stones persist. Some per¬ 
sons, however, cannot undergo the 
surgical operation and must have 
continuous medical treatment and 
care. 

Cholecystitis is the serious condi¬ 
tion incurred by infection and in¬ 


flammation when interruption of the 
flow of bile occurs. Acute pak in 
the upper right abdomen, abdomen 
distended by gas, and sometimes 
jaundice and fever accompany 
cholecystitis. When such attacks be¬ 
come a major problem, the solution 
is surgical removal of the gallblad¬ 
der, preferably not during an acute 
episode. Nevertheless, if continued 
vomiting, rapid pulse, and indications 
of poisoning ensue, it may be neces¬ 
sary to operate immediately. 


389 



GALLSTONES 


GALLSTONES 


Chronic infection and inflamma¬ 
tion of the gallbladder induce a tend¬ 
ency to fomation of stones, and 
s>iinptoms of chronic indigestion are 
constantly present. The patient feels 
too Ml after eating, especially if he 
has had fatty foods. Pain on the right 
Side is likely, and may be intensified 
by stooping or bending. Heartburn 
often accompanies this condition and 
medical examination reveals hyper¬ 
acidity in the stomach. 

A special technique for detection 
of gallstones is one of the outstanding 
achievements of medical science. A 
substance, iodophthalein, when in¬ 
gested or injected into the blood 
stream, renders the gallbladder visible 
on an x-ray photograph, so that the 
functions of the liver and gallbladder 
may be evaluated. The substance is 
carried by the blood to the liver, then 
in the bile to the gallbladder. If the 
x-ray plates do not reveal the gall¬ 
bladder, further studies are made to 
detennine whether or not the bile 
duct is Mocked. If the gallbladder is 
visible in the roentgenograms, most 
of the stones will also be seen. Some 
stones are visible by x-ray without the 
aid of iodophthalein. 

Jaundice in severe cases may be 
active but does not always accom¬ 
pany chronic gallbladder infection. 
Infection of the gallbladder produces 
a great range of internal symptoms 
which involve almost any organ but 
the one actually responsible. A tight¬ 
ness of the chest, palpitating heart, 
or shortness of breath may be quite 
confusing in these circumstances. 
Medical examination is indispensable 
to determine the exact cause and 


condition. Many persons live for 
years with a chronically inflamed gall¬ 
bladder and without serious conse¬ 
quences. The risk, however, is al¬ 
ways present. Surgical removal of the 
gallbladder obviates these possibil¬ 
ities. The operation is a major one, 
usually successful. Symptoms 
promptly disappear, but diet regula¬ 
tion is desirable for a number of 
months. See also cholecystitis; 

GALLSTONES. 

GALLSTONES, small masses of a 
substance composed most frequently 
of cholesterol, bile salts, and color¬ 
ing matter. They often form in the 
gallbladder or bile ducts, and may 
cause symptoms varying from mild 
colicky pain to rapture of the gall¬ 
bladder and peritonitis or even in¬ 
fection of the pancreas. Gallstones 
usually occur after the age of forty 
although younger women may de¬ 
velop them after pregnancy. In gen¬ 
eral, women are more often affected 
than men. Gallstones are best seen 
by x-ray. 

Gallstones cause colicky pain as 
they pass into and along the bile ducts 
and are often followed by infection 
in the liver and by jaundice. They 
may become lodged at the entrance 
to the duodenem, causing intense 
jaundice and severe itching. 

Mild attacks of gallstone colic are 
often treated by rest and hot packs 
on the stomach. However, a severe 
attack requires the attention of a 
doctor who may prescribe pain-re¬ 
lieving drugs. Usually the gallbladder 
and stones are surgicaEy removed; the 
operation is performed frequently 


390 



GAMMA GLOBULi^l 


GANGRENE 


and is rarely complicated. See also 

GALLBLADDER. 

GAMMA GLOBULIN, a chemical 
substance found in the protein globu¬ 
lins of the blood plasma. The blood 
has the power to develop antibodies 
to combat disease. The antibodies in 
gamma globulin have been found use¬ 
ful in developing immunity to measles 
in children as well as in hepatitis and 
other infections. Commercially avail¬ 
able serum containing globulin has 
been used to advantage both in devel¬ 
oping temporary immunity to measles 
and also to lighten an attack of 
measles in a child who has been ex¬ 
posed and develops the disease. 

GANGRENE, the death of tissue, 
caused by interruption of circulation. 
It can result from accidental damage 
to the tissue, as in burns, wounds, 
crushing or poisoning of the flesh. 
Interruption of circulation with the 
ensuing death of the flesh can be 
caused by other conditions—for ex¬ 
ample, a hernia—or by a section of 
lung failing to receive its supply of 
blood. Diseases such as diabetes, 
hardening of the arteries, or Bright’s 
disease may affect circulation in a 
similar way. 

Gangrene is sometimes classified as 
dry or moist, depending on whether 
or not certain fluids flow toward or 
away from the area. In dry gangrene 
the tissue gradually shrinks and the 
color becomes brown and finally 
black. In moist gangrene the tissue 
is swollen, often blistered, and has 
the colors characteristic of a bruise. 
Moist gangrene is more dangerous 
than dry because it offers greater op¬ 


portunity for iofectioii. Since the m- 
fection can be fata.! the doctor takes 
special precautions against bacterial 
invasion. The skin is thorough!} and 
regularly cleaned, particularly the 
skin around fingernails and toenails 
where germs might find a breeding 
place, and the nails themse!\es are 
usually clipped as short as possible. 
Antiseptic dressings are frequently 
applied. 

Eventually a red line, the line of 
demarcation, will appear on the skin. 
This line separates the dead tissue 
from that which can heal. The doctor 
will try to save the tissue capable of 
healing, and stop the progress of the 
deteriorating tissue. Sometimes am¬ 
putation is the only means of stop¬ 
ping rapidly deteriorating tissue. 
However, it may be necessary to 
operate without waiting for the ap¬ 
pearance of the line of demarcation, 
even at the sacrifice of potentially 
healthy tissue. 

Injury of tissue, as in wounds, en¬ 
courages certain types of bacteria 
which cause gas gangrene. These 
germs behave as ferments and break 
up the sugars in the tissues so as to 
produce a gas which soon spreads 
through the muscles. The area be¬ 
comes severely inflamed, and in later 
stages the color changes to yellow 
and then black. The progress of gas 
gangrene varies among patients; in 
some it is rapid, in others slow. As 
yet there is no fuE explanation for 
this difference, although the severity 
of the wound seems to be a primary 
consideration. 

During World War I when gas gan¬ 
grene first became a serious problem. 


391 



GARGLE 


GASTRITIS 


the only medical solotioii was to re- 
iTiO¥e all damaged tissue from the 
body as soon as possible. However, 
duriog World War II a serum was de¬ 
veloped which could be injected into 
a person threatened with gas gan¬ 
grene; and, if the infection had al¬ 
ready started, snifa drags were ordi¬ 
narily sufficient to bring it under 
control. See also frostbite. 

GARGLE, a liquid solution used to 
rinse the throat, pharynx, and naso¬ 
pharynx, and held in this area by a 
stream of air from the lungs. Since 
some of the liquid may be acci¬ 
dentally swallowed, anything which 
might be internally harmful should 
never be used as a gargle. If an in¬ 
flammation is so severe that gargling 
causes pain, the liquid may be held 
in the throat for a few minutes, or 
merely swished around, or sprayed 
in with an atomizer. For a slightly 
irritated throat, a pinch of salt or 
bicarbonate of soda diluted in warm 
water is often helpful. 

GASTRIC, a term derived from the 
Greek word ‘^gastro,” meaning stom¬ 
ach. In medicine many words begin¬ 
ning with '*gastro” are used which 
relate to medical conditions affect¬ 
ing the stomach. Accordingly gastritis 
is an inflammation of the stomach, 
gastroenteritis an inflammation of the 
stomach and intestines, gastrectomy 
the removal of all or a part of the 
stomach, gastroscope a device for 
looking inside the stomach. 

GASTRIC ULCER. See peptic ul¬ 
cer. 

GASTRmS. a frequent form of 

J92 


‘‘stomach upset,” is inflammation of 
the stomach wall. When the lining of 
the stomach is irritated or infected, it 
becomes red and swollen and in a 
severe inflammation may even Meed, 

Gastritis may be acute or chronic. 
Acute inflammation is often caused 
by food poisoning, eating spoiled 
food, or simply overeating. The lining 
of the stomach may also become seri¬ 
ously inflamed following the swal¬ 
lowing of irritating substances like 
lye, acid, or poison, and quick action 
by a physician to remove the sub¬ 
stance is imperative. This must be 
followed by neutralization of the poi¬ 
son or the stomach wall will be per¬ 
forated and acute peritonitis will set 
in. Surgical treatment may also be 
necessary. 

Symptoms of acute gastritis in¬ 
clude loss of appetite, a sense of pres¬ 
sure and fullness in the pit of the 
stomach which is unrelieved by belch¬ 
ing, nausea, headache, and a slight 
rise in temperature- Vomiting then 
follows, producing a sense of relief. 
However, the person will feel ex¬ 
tremely fatigued afterward. Examina¬ 
tion of the material from the stomach 
enables the doctor to determine the 
nature and severity of the inflamma¬ 
tion, Relief of acute gastritis is usu¬ 
ally brought about in a few days by 
eliminating the irritating substance 
and being careful of food intake. 

Diagnosis and treatment of con¬ 
stant or chronic gastritis are difficult. 
Many different conditions may pro¬ 
duce these repeated irritations of the 
stomach lining, and treatment re¬ 
quires observation and control by the 
physician over a long period of time. 



GASTROENTEiiTiS 


GEilATiiCS 


Certain vitamin deficiencies in tlie 
diet produce a tendency to irritation 
and inflaminatioii. Disorders of the 
secretion of gastric juice may also be 
the cause* Gastritis is generally part 
of the development of an ulcer in 
the stomacli, and a chronic ulcer is 
likely to produce chronic gastritis. 
Alcohol taken in excess produces irri- 
tation^ followed by inflammation. 

In treatment of chronic gastritis, 
small meals of easily digested foods at 
frequent intervals are prescribed. Ir¬ 
ritating foods must be avoided, and 
drugs to reduce excess stomach 
acidity will be administered. The 
physician treating chronic gastritis 
must carefully examine the entire 
system and general health of the pa¬ 
tient. If the condition is severe, it 
may be desirable to begin treatment 
with a few days of rest in bed and a 
milk or light bland diet. Medication 
to promote regularity of the bowels 
may be prescribed, and later sub¬ 
stances to promote appetite and di¬ 
gestion. See also diet in digestive 
disorders; digestion; digestive 
system; stomach. 

GASTMOMSTTEMITIS, a general 
term that applies to a variety of 
gastrointestinal disturbances. In this 
inflammatory condition of the stom¬ 
ach and intestines nausea, vomiting, 
and diarrhea occur, generally accom¬ 
panied by cramps. 

Acute gastroenteritis of a nonspe¬ 
cific nature occurs in alcoholism, ma¬ 
laria, acute hepatitis, and as a sensi¬ 
tivity reaction to certain foods. Food 
poisoning by staphylococci is a form 
of g^troenteritis. 


Treatment ot gastroenteritis may 
vary from temporary change of diet 
in mild disorders to surgery in ex¬ 
treme cases. See appropriate heading 
for discussion of specific symptoms 
and treatment. See also amebic d-^s- 
entery; bacillary dysentery; di¬ 
arrhea; FOOD poisoning; gastritis. 

GASTROPTOSIS, dropping of the 
stomach, a condition caused by dom n- 
ward displacement of the siooiach 
which may be seen by x-ray. 

GELATIN, an opaque substance, 
pale yellow, odorless, and almost 
tasteless, produced by boiling the 
skin, bones, and ligaments of animals 
and treating with acid. It is dry when 
hard and jellylike when moist. Gela¬ 
tin is considered a protein, but it 
does not possess all of the amino 
acids which are necessary for growth. 
Gelatin is the basis for such products 
as glues and jellies. When used in 
desserts it is usually flavored and 
sweetened. It is medicinally used in 
accelerating coagulation of blood by 
intravenous injection, and experimen¬ 
tal work is being done with gelatin 
as a blood substitute. Gelatin also 
stimulates healthful growth of nails. 

GERIATRICS, the science of medi¬ 
cal and hygienic care of aged people. 
It has broadened and expanded in 
recent years because of the increased 
number of older people. In 1890, the 
number of persons in the United 
States over sixty-five was about 3 per 
cent. Today sociologists estimate that 
in 1970 more than 20 per cent of the 
population will be over sixty-five. 
Geriatrics must therefore become 


393 



GEiMAN MEASLES 


GERMICIDE 


more and more signiicaat in the fti- 
tnre* See aha senescence; senility, 

GERB'fAIM MEASLES^ also known 
as three-day measles or rubella, a 
mild but higMy infectious viras dis- 
ease« German measles occurs in epi¬ 
demics at three- to four-year intervals, 
otten in early spring, together with 
an outbreak of measles. It affects 
persons of all ages, though it is un¬ 
common in infants and children un¬ 
der four, and generally occurs most 
frequently in older children and 
young adults. German measles during 
pregnancy may be harmful to the 
fetus. 

German measles, like measles, is 
transmitted most commonly by drop¬ 
let infection and direct contact. The 
incubation period is from fourteen to 
seventeen days, occasionally ranging 
from ten to twenty-one days. The in¬ 
fectious period is generally a day or 
two before the rash appears. 

The first symptoms in younger peo¬ 
ple are slight, a scant rise in tempera¬ 
ture, perhaps a running nose and 
some soreness of the throat. In older 
persons, German measles may be ac¬ 
companied by headache, weakness, 
slight fever, sore throat, and swelling 
of the glands at the back of the head 
and neck, with some tenderness. Usu¬ 
ally the rash is the first symptom 
noted by the patient. It appears after 
twenty-four to forty-eight hours, first 
on the face, forehead, scalp, and be¬ 
hind the ears, then spreading over 
the body. The rash resembles scarlet 
fever rash more than measles rash. 
Itching may aggravate the rounded 
rose-red spots, which are separate at 
first, then tend to run together. The 


rash lasts about three days and fades 
with a fine scaling. Kopiik's spots do 
not appear in German measles. 

The general treatment is similar to 
that for measles. The person should 
remain in bed until Ms temperature 
is normal and the rash has disap¬ 
peared. As in measles, he should be 
isolated, since he is infectious for 
about ten days after the appearance 
of the rash. German measles is not 
dangerous, but all efforts should be 
made to avoid secondary infections, 
since encephalitis is a rare but possi¬ 
ble complication. One attack of Ger¬ 
man measles confers lasting im¬ 
munity. The patient’s bedding and 
linens and bedclothing should be 
disinfected and the sickroom thor- 
ougMy aired. Children who have been 
in contact with German measles 
should be kept out of school for at 
least three weeks from the date of 
the last contact. 

If German measles occurs during 
the first third of pregnancy, the 
possibility is great that the child 
may have congenital defects, such as 
cataracts, heart malformations, deaf¬ 
ness, or mental retardation. These 
serious complications have been 
known to occur in more than 50 per 
cent of such cases. Therefore, it is 
essential that an obstetrician be 
notified immediately. 

GERMICIDE, any substance that 
kills germs. There is a significant dis¬ 
tinction between germicides and anti¬ 
septics; antiseptics destroy poisonous 
material as well as germs and also 
inhibit and prevent multiplication of 
germs. 


394 



GERMS 


GLANDS 


GERMS. See bacteria. 

GIANTISM. See acromegaly. 

GINGIYITIS, an iiiflammatioa of 
the gums. Pyorrhea is a form of 
gingivitis with pus, and the condition 
called Vincent’s disease or trench 
mouth is also gingivitis. See also 
pyorrhea; VINCENT’S ANGINA, 

GLANDERSj a contagious disease 
of animals, involving swe'Uings under 
the jaws and an abundant discharge 
of mucus from the nostrils. This 
disease, although found ordinarily 
among horses, mules, and donkeys, 
is occasionally communicated to 
human beings, primarily to persons 
who work with horses. This happened 
more frequently in the past when 
horses were more commonly used. 

When the germ gains entrance into 
human tissue, it may be weeks before 
the first signs of the illness appear, 
A test exists, similar to the Wasser- 
mann test, by which the presence of 
the germ can be recognized. High 
fever, vomiting, and diarrhea ac¬ 
company this disease. Where the 
germs localize, a swelling occurs and 
large ulcers and abscesses of the 
lymph glands appear rapidly. The 
latter are first seen as small knots 
under the skin, known as “farcy 
buds.” 

If this disease becomes chronic in 
a person, severe damage to the carti¬ 
lage and bones is likely. In the 
chronic form, there is constant fever 
and abnormal thinness. So-called 
chronic glanders, as contrasted to the 
acute form, is sometimes curable. 
Antibiotics, antitoxins, and surgery 
are all usually necessary. 


When this disease is contracted h\ 
a human being he should be isolated 
at once, and ail discharges troni his 
body should be rem.o\ed on mat dials 
which can be easily burned These 
precautionary measures are necessary 
because the disease is highly con¬ 
tagious as well as dangerous. For the 
same reasons, animals infected with 
glanders are always destro>ed 

GLANDS, organs of the body which 
develop a secretion, a substance 
which performs a specific function, 
as in digestion. Many of the body’s 
most important processes are effected 
through the glands and their secre¬ 
tions. 

The glands are of external and of 
internal secretion. The glands of ex- 
temal secretion include the digestive 
glands and the sweat glands of the 
skin. Those of internal secretion, also 
known as the endocrine glands, 
secrete their products, called hor¬ 
mones, into the blood. These are 
carried to other parts of the body 
where they exert specific effects on 
other glands or organs. Some glands 
of external secretion also produce 
substances which penetrate the Mood 
as internal secretions or hormones. 

Glands of externa! secretion in¬ 
clude the liver, which produces bile; 
the stomach, which gives hydro- 
cMoric acid and pepsin for digestion; 
the breasts, which secrete milk; the 
salivary glands, which produce the 
saliva that moistens the mouth and 
contains digestive substances; the 
pancreas, which produce trypsin used 
in digestion and also insulin, an 
internal substance which regulates the 
use of sugar; and the sex glands. 


395 



PINEAL GLAND 


PHUtTARY GLAND 



THYROID GLAND 


SUPRARENAL 

CAPSULES 


OVARIES 



PARATHYROID 

GLAND 


INTERNAL 

.MAMMARY 

GLAND 

(THYMUS) 


PANCREAS 


Giemds — The endocrine glands of fhe body. These glands secrete their hormones directly 
info the blood stream. In the male the sex hormone is produced by the testes. Some of these 
glands produce more than one hormone and some feature prominently in other body func¬ 
tions in addition to their endocrine activity. The endocrine glands regulate mony functions 
of the body. The growth and final size of the body, mental development, personality, 
masculinity or femininity are some aspects influenced by the endocrine system. 


The glands of internal secretion 
are more complex in operation and 
more far-reaching in effect than the 
glands of external secretion. For ex¬ 
ample, whereas hydrochloric acid 
found in the stomach acts directly 
on food, the products of the endo¬ 
crine glands function indirectly, To- 

396 


gether they form a system which 
regulates many of the body’s most 
vital processes. 

The ^ands control growth, the 
body’s response to stress of aU kinds, 
and initiate its defenses, and govern 
the development of sexual maturity. 
ITiey induce the secondary physical 



GLAUCOMA 


GLAUCOMA 


characteristics which distinguish men 
from women, such as hair on the 
face and the deeper voice. They 
regidate the delicately balanced ex¬ 
penditure of energy that persists con¬ 
tinuously in the tissues, and are in¬ 
timately involved in metabolism. 

The endocrine glands include the 
pituitary, sometimes called the 
“master gland” because it performs a 
multiplicity of functions and helps 
regulate other endocrine glands such 
as the thyroid gland involved in the 
consumption of oxygen; the adrenal 
gland, divided into two parts, the 
medulla and the cortex, which among 
other functions assist the body in 
emergencies; the testes and ovaries, 
male and female sex glands which 
affect both sexual processes and, even 
more, general body conditions; the 
parathyroids which control the cal¬ 
cium and phosphorus content of the 
blood; and the pineal and thymus 
glands which are less well under¬ 
stood than the others. 

Endocrine disorders may have pro¬ 
found effects. A pituitary ^and which 
is not functioning properly may 
cause giantism or dwarfism or per¬ 
manent enlargement of the chin, 
hands, and feet. A th 3 nroid gland de¬ 
ficient at birth retards the growth of 
the body and mind, and causes 
feeble-mindedness. Later thyroid dis¬ 
order may greatly accelerate or ab¬ 
normally retard various processes, 
reacting unfavorably on the heart or 
other orgai3s. Lack of the hormones 
of the cortex, which Is the outer 
layer of the adrenal glands, produces 
death in a few days if they are not 
replaced. Disturbances of the sex 


glands and their hormones may cause 
a woman to assume male attributes or 
a man to develop feminine attributes. 
If a duct of a gland is blocked the 
secretion continues. The accumula¬ 
tion of fluid causes the gland to 
dilate and form a retention cyst. An 
adenoma is a tumor with glandular 
structure. 

The normal course of development 
of a human being comprises the 
initial period of growth, a plateau 
through the years of odddle life when 
maturity is reached and then a 
gradual decline. Many unjustified or 
actually fraudulent claims are made 
that the glands promote rejuvenation. 
None has been substantiated and re¬ 
juvenation is as far beyond human 
reach as ever. See also adrenai. 
glands; endocrine glands; hor¬ 
mones; and imder names of separate 
glands. 

GLAUCOMA, a disease of the eyes 
in which loss of vision is caused by 
a pressure inside the eyeball. This 
pressure occurs when optical fluid 
tends to accumulate there. In one 
form of glaucoma, this accumulation 
is caused by improper circulation. 
Pain results and soon the eyeball is 
hard and red, and the pupil itself 
becomes gray and cloudy. Another 
form of glaucoma, regarded as more 
serious, results from the accumula¬ 
tion of fluid caused by failure of the 
drainage system. The internal pres¬ 
sure and the loss of vision, however, 
develop more slowly. 

In the earlier stages of glaucoma, 
VBual difficulty occurs at botJi sides 
of the area of vision, though the 


397 



GLfOMA 


GOITER 


person with glaucoma is able to see 
in front as well as ever. As the dis¬ 
ease develops, however, the area of 
clear frontal vision gradually be¬ 
comes narrower until finally the per¬ 
son is completely blind. 

In diagnosis of the disease, the 
eye specialist employs several me¬ 
chanical aids. He uses the ophthal¬ 
moscope to judge whether the internal 
pressure is sufficient to depress the 
optic nerve at the rear of the eye. 
With a tonometer he can estimate 
whether or not the pressure is in¬ 
creasing. The perimeter measures the 
breadth of vision; a progressive de¬ 
crease in breadth is a sign of glau¬ 
coma. These instruments enable a 
prompt diagnosis which may save the 
sight. 

In all stages of this disease, but 
especially at the onset, the patient 
should avoid excitement since the 
resulting rise in pressure increases 
the flow of blood into the arteries of 
the eyes, where the internal accumu¬ 
lation of fluid is already excessive. 

In the treatment of glaucoma, eye¬ 
glasses are ineffective and in no way 
helpful. Drugs, however, are some¬ 
times successfully used to contract 
the pupE and also to decrease pres¬ 
sure within the eyeball. Frequently 
surgery can control glaucoma and 
actually save the patient’s sight. See 
also EYE. 

GLIOMA, a tumor of the nervous 
tissue occurring principally in the 
brain, spinal cord, peripheral nerves, 
and the adrenals. 

GLOSSITIS, an inflammation of the 
tip and margin of the tongue, gener¬ 


ally caused by a vitamin B 2 , Ribo¬ 
flavin, deficiency which occurs when 
the diet consists chiefly of such foods 
as com, rice, or potatoes. 

GLOTTIS, the opening between the 
vocal cords which is protected by the 
epiglottis. See also epiglottis. 

GLUCOSE, the chemical term for 
dextrose and for blood sugar. The 
glucose tolerance test is used to de¬ 
termine whether or not a diabetic 
condition exists. For this test a solu¬ 
tion of glucose is given intravenously 
or by mouth and the blood and urine 
examined to establish the level of the 
blood ^ucose at specific intervals. 
The test is also used in diseases of 
the liver and the thyroid gland and to 
determine the absorptive capacity of 
the gastrointestinal tract. 

GOITER, enlargment of the th 5 Toid 
gland, located in the front of the 
neck. In exophthalmic goiter the 
gland becomes overactive and is usu¬ 
ally but not always enlarged. Ordi¬ 
nary or simple goiter begins early 
in adolescence and is directly as¬ 
sociated with an inadequate supply of 
iodine in the diet. Goiter is most 
common in inland and mountainous 
areas away from the sea where there 
is a deficiency of iodine in the soil 
and water. Simple goiter occurs in¬ 
frequently in coastal areas, and is 
five times more common in women 
than men. 

Within the thyroid gland are small 
vessels which contains a yellow sub¬ 
stance called colloid. Colloid contains 
a small amount of iodine, so little 
that a man weighing 150 pounds 


398 



GOITER 


GOITER 


has no more than 1/40,000th of a 
pound of Iodine. Iodine is also pres¬ 
ent in thyroxin^ the secretion or 
hormone of the thyroid gland. The 
thyroid absorbs the iodine from 
Iodine-containing foods and liquids 
taken into the body. 

As a preventive measure against 
goiter, small amounts of iodine are 
sometimes given to young people, 
particularly those who live in areas 
where the water and soil are low in 
iodine. Iodine is also administered to 
pregnant mothers to prevent unde¬ 
sirable changes in the thyroid gland 
of the developing embryo. Iodine is 
often added to table salt, 'Iodized” 
salt, and can be added to drinking 
water. Iodine-containing tablets are 
also available. The use of iodine 
should be prescribed by the doctor to 
assure that the proper amount is 
given; the actual amount of iodine 
taken to supplement the diet is small. 

In cases in which the thyroid gland 
becomes so large as to be a deformity 
and a discxjinfort to the person, it is 
ordinarEy removed by surgery. How¬ 
ever, this condition is rare today. 

Exophthalmic goiter is usuafly 
more serious than simple goiter. The 
processes in which the gland is in¬ 
volved through its secretion, thyroxin, 
axe abnormally quickened. A typical 
symptom of the condition is bulging 
eyes, the derivation of the term 
“exophthalmic.” The disorder occurs 
most frequently in young adults, 
especially young women, in urban 
areas, and is apparently associated 
with stresses on the nervous system. 
The overactivity of the thyroid gland 
causes the basic chemical changes 


throughout the body to accelerate 
abnormally; the basal metabolism rate 
rises; the heart beats faster. The per¬ 
son tires easily, his appetite increases, 
he feels warm, is more nerv’ous than 
usual and inclined to excitability, he 
begins to lose weight, his hands may 
tremble, and he often engages in 
excessive activity. Substantially these 
same symptoms can be produced by 
ingestion of too much extract of the 
thyroid gland. 

To establish whether or not thjToid 
activity is excessive, the doctor gives 
the patient a basal metabolism test. 
Normal basal metabolism ranges 
from plus 7 to minus 7; in exophthal¬ 
mic goiter, or hyperthyroidism, this 
measurement may rise as high as 
plus 15, 30, or even higher. The heart 
may consequently be forced to work 
far beyond its capacity- Administra¬ 
tion of extra iodine may reduce the 
heart action and relieve the symp¬ 
toms, but this is only a partial remedy 
and should only be prescribed and 
supervised by a doctor. Physical and 
mental rest are beneficial to the 
patient. 

For permanent relief part of the 
thyroid gland is removed surgically. 
Enou^ of the gland is left to per¬ 
form its normal functions and pro¬ 
vide the necessary thyroxin. The 
amount of the gland to be removed is 
established by the surgeon at the 
time of the operation. Sometimes 
supplemental thyroid material must 
be given for a time after surgery 
until the gland and body adjust prop¬ 
erly to the loss of part of the thyroid 
gland. 

Recently other means have been 

399 



GOMORRHEA 


GONORRHEA 


found for controlling excessive thy¬ 
roid activity, such as radioactive 
iodine; thiocyanates, which lower 
blood pressure and depress thyroid 
activity; and thiouracil which con¬ 
trols the major symptoms. Radio¬ 
active iodine also assists in diagnosis; 
since the thyroid gland absorbs iodine 
entering the body, a test of the 
amount of radioactivity emanating 
from the thyroid can be made which 
guides the doctor in deciding how 
much radioactive iodine should be 
given for actual treatment. Radiation 
from the iodine directly affects the 
cells of the gland and permanently 
lowers its activity. 

Hyperthyroidism may also result 
from the growth of a tumor in 
the gland which may in turn have 
developed from a simple goiter. Be¬ 
cause of the possibility of cancer as 
well as hyperthyroidism, these tumors 
are often removed surgically. See also 
EXOPHTHALMIC GOITER. 

GONORRHEA, a contagious vene¬ 
real disease, characterized fay inflam¬ 
mation of the genital mucous 
membranes and caused by a micro¬ 
organism, Neisseria gonorrheae, more 
commonly known as the gonococcus 
germ. Gonorrhea is the most common 
venereal disease and occurs through¬ 
out the world. Adults are almost al¬ 
ways infected by sexual contact with 
an infected person. An epidemic 
form occurs in young girls which is 
spread through nonsexual objects, 
such as clothing or toys. 

Symptoms of infection appear in 
about three days, although they can 
take as long as three weeks, after 


exposure. In the male the first symp¬ 
toms are usually a slight feeling of 
irritation or burning sensation when 
urinating because of the inflammation 
of the urethra. If the person is not 
treated, a large amount of pus is 
produced and an increased amount of 
discharge may be noticed. Compli¬ 
cations can ensue which cause 
damage to other areas of the sex 
organs, such as the sex glands, and 
to other parts of the body, such as 
bones, eyes, joints, kidneys, and heart. 

In women, gonorrhea affects the 
urinary passage and may extend to 
the bladder and kidneys. In the past, 
treatment of the infection in women 
was much more difficult than in men, 
because the organs are less accessible. 
Formerly a person infected with 
gonorrhea was incapacitated for 
weeks or even years, but new meth¬ 
ods of treatment with penicillin and 
other antibiotics, under direction of a 
physician, can bring about a cure in 
one or two da)^, provided the in¬ 
fection is brought to the attention of 
a physician in time. The rapidity and 
effectiveness of the new drugs has 
brought about hopes that the disease 
might eventually be totally elimi¬ 
nated. 

Gonorrheal infection of the eyes, 
although it does occur in adults, is 
more frequent in newborn infants, 
who become infected as they pass 
throu^ the birth canal. It is esti¬ 
mated that gonorrheal eye infection 
is responsible for 10,000 cases of 
bhttdness in the United States. Doc¬ 
tors now administer dilute silver 
nitrate solution into the eyes of new¬ 
born infants to prevent this infection. 


400 




©oyf — (A) Gout IS a common joint-disabling disease. It affects the extremities and causes 
redness, swelling and pain. In acute attacks pain can be excruciating Lumps or deposits of 
white material (tophi) in the joints indicate presence of gout. Here deposits are shown on 
the knee cap. (B) large deposits in the tissue of the fingers causing swelling of the joints 
Gout has been present in this patient for 27 years. fC) Tophi of the great toe. Most people 
get their first attack of gout in the great toe Gout which begins in some other part of the 
body eventually involves the great toe. (D) Tophi appear late in the disease, and not oil 
patients with gout develop deposits. This man has a lump in the cartilage of the ear {E| 
Deposits on the elbow. The joint is swollen, red and very tender. Fain can be felt simply 
by touching the area. (F) Tophi of the foot, affecting the heel area and the great foe. in the 
absence of tophi gout can be diagnosed by X-ray and laboratory tests. 


Many urge tlie me of other drags 
such as antibiotics. 

In treating gonorrhea with penicii*- 
lin» the physician must be particularly 
careful, since the patient may seem 
to be cured but still be able to 
transmit the disease, and penicillin, 
althou^ it may cure the gonorrhea, 
may cover up, but not cure, an 
unsuspected case of syphilis, also 


present Syphilis requires larger doses 
of penicillin. Therefore, if sypMlis 
is also suspected, the physician may 
use a sulfonamide drag, which wil 
not cover up a developing syphilitic 
condition. 

GOUT, a disease in which the pri¬ 
mary symptom is a painful inflamma¬ 
tion of the joints of the hands or 


401 


GRANULOCYTOPENIA 


GRAVES' DISEASE 


feet, and especially of the big toe. 
This infiammatioa arises when uric 
acid in the blood increases, is not 
destroyed by the body, and accumu¬ 
lates in the blood, where it combines 
with sodium to create sodium urate. 
The sodium urate may eventually be 
deposited in the cartilage and other 
tissues. It is not as yet known why 
the excess of uric acid appears in 
the blood, why the excess is not de¬ 
stroyed, or why urates are deposited 
in the tissue. 

Gout usually begins with pain in 
the big toe, occasionally in the ankle, 
heel, or even instep, and is ordinarily 
accompanied by chills and fever. The 
pain resembles that of a violent dis¬ 
location. The affected joint becomes 
so sensitive that any pressure, even 
that of bedclothes, is unendurable. 
This disease attacks men, and oc¬ 
casionally women, in their middle 
thirties as well as in their sixties or 
later, contrary to popular belief that 
it is a condition resulting from a 
diet of rich foods in advanced years. 
Gout finally becomes chronic. 

Among the drugs used in the 
treatment of gout are salicylic acid, 
cortisone, ACTH, Butazolidin, Ben- 
emid, anturan and colchicine, a drug 
used to treat gout since the fifth 
century. These drugs should be taken 
only under supervision of a physician, 
since they can be toxic with many 
side effects if improperly used. Gout 
is also relieved by application of heat 
to the painful joint and by protect¬ 
ing it from disturbing external con¬ 
tacts. 

Anyone with gout should avoid 


excesses of diet or exercise. The diet 
should largely exclude foods con¬ 
taining white crystalline substances 
known as purines, which includes 
most meats, such as beef, veal, pork, 
and bacon, and most animal organ 
foods, such as liver, sweetbreads, 
kidneys, and brains. Milk, eggs, and 
cheese, cereals, fruits, green vege¬ 
tables, cocoa, tea, coffee, sweets, and 
nuts are relatively low in purines. 

GRANULOCYTOPENIA. See 

AGRANULOCYTOSIS. 

GRANULOMA INGUINALE, a 
disease usually regarded as venereal 
although no evidence exists that it is 
transmitted by sexual contact. It’s 
main symptom is deep ulcerations on 
and around the genitals and is thought 
to be caused by a microorganism. 
There are approximately five to ten 
thousand cases of granuloma ingui¬ 
nale in the United States and it is 
associated with uncleanliness. 

Following exposure, the disease be¬ 
comes noticeable one to four weeks 
later. The first symptom is swelling, 
usually in the groin, and this swollen 
area then ruptures and ulcers form. 
As the ulcers heal, new ulcers con¬ 
tinue to appear, and the disease may 
eventually cover the reproductive 
organs, lower abdomen and buttocks. 
These lesions have an unpleasant 
odor. A person with granuloma in¬ 
guinale apparently develops little 
immunity and may have the con¬ 
dition for many years. Streptomycin 
and terramycin have both proved 
successful in treatment of the disease. 

GRAVES’ DISEASE, another name 


402 



GRIPPE 


GYf^ECOMASTIA 


for exopiitlialoiic goiter. See ex¬ 
ophthalmic GOITER. 

GRIPPE. See influenza. 

GUMSy mucoiis membranes which 
cover the margin of the Jaw and 
surround the roots of the teeth. In¬ 
flammation of the gum^ known as 
gingivitis^ may be general as in stoma¬ 
titis of the mouth or local as in the 
area of an infected tooth. 

Pyorrhea is the most common and 
serious pumient infection of the 
gums. Gums axe sensitive and bleed 
easily, especially when brushed too 
vigorously, and in certain disorders 
like scurvy they become soft and 
spongy. The gums are also subject 
to tumors and alveolar abscesses 
which are deep-seated infections. 
Suppuration of the gum, or ulceration 


with pus, is called a gumboil. Alien- 
tioo by a dental surgeon will prevent 
permanent scars of the cheek or neck 
if the infection spreads. After elimi¬ 
nating the infection, the offending 
tooth or teeth must be treated. See 
also gingivitis; pyorrhea; teeth. 

GYNECOLOGY, the medical science 
concerned with the diseases of 
women, particularly those of the 
organs related to childbirth. A gyne¬ 
cologist is a specialist in these 
diseases. 

GYNECOMASTIA, derived from 
two words meaniiig women and 
breasts, a condition of enlargement of 
the breasts which affects males only. 
It is usually related to some glandular 
disturbance. Excessive enlargement 
may be surgically treated. 


403 




HABIT SPASM, or tic, the habitual 
and involuntary contraction of a 
muscle. Habit spasms occur most 
frequently in the face, perhaps be¬ 
cause the facial muscles are remark¬ 
ably flexible, especially when stimu¬ 
lated by emotions. So minute and 
lively are some of the facial muscles 
that often their habit spasms are 
visible only to trained observers. The 
tiny muscles close to the eye are 
particularly susceptible to these 
spasms. 

Parents or teachers sometimes mis¬ 
take a habit spasm for a symptom 
of St. Vitus’ dance. The difference 
between the two, however, is easily 
defined. Habit spasms are predictable 
and always occur in the same 
manner; whereas the spasms seen 
in St. Vitus’ dance are varied and 
therefore unpredictable. 

Habit spasms can be treated 
effectively only after the cause has 
been ascertained by expert study. M 
the cause is physical, the cure may 
also be physical, via medication or 


surgery or perhaps merely by the 
adjustment of eyeglasses. Frequently, 
however, the cause is emotional. A 
habit spasm in a child might be 
traced, for example, to chronic fear 
of punishment, and the parents might 
find it desirable to secure psycho¬ 
therapy for the child. See chorea; 
convulsion; tic douloureux. 

HAIR, slender threadlike outgrowths 
from follicles in the skin. 

Structure. The hair root is that 
part of a hair beneath the surface of 
the skin. The sebaceous glands have 
their openings in the hair follicles 
and secrete sebum which gives the 
skin and scalp its oily appearance. 
The color of the hair is due to the 
presence of pigment cells. Attached 
to the follicles axe tiny muscles which 
erect the follicle and incidentally the 
hair. These operate in excitement, 
when the hair “stands on end,” or in 
chills, when “goose pimples” appear. 

Growth. Hair grows at a regular 
rate in the average person of about 


404 



HA!i 



an inch in six meeks. Then the follicle 
rests for a period varjdng from a 
few weeks to as mncii as ten or 
eleven weeks* The hair of the head^ 
except in baldness, has an almost 
continBous activity of the follicles, 
each hair being replaced almost as 
soon as it reaches its fuH length. 

Several different kinds of hair 
grow on the body. The hair on the 
scalp varies considerably, both as to 
the number of hairs and the length 
to which they grow. About 125,000 
hairs grow on the scalp of the 
average person. Blondes have more 
hair on the scalp than dark people. 
The average length to which a hair 
will grow on a woman is sixty to 
seventy centimeters or about twenty- 
five inches, and it takes about four 
years to reach that length. Hair that 
is cylindrical hangs straight from the 
head and oval hair becomes curly. 

The total number of hairs in each 
eyebrow is around 600 and such hair 
lasts about 112 days. As people be¬ 
come older the eyebrows tend to 
curl and grow longer so that they 
have to be trimmed. The hair of the 
eyelashes is practically identical with 
that of the eyebrows except that it 
is sHghtly more curved. The average 
diameter of the hair of the beard in¬ 
creases throughout life, so that these 
hairs become coarser and more bris¬ 
tling in advanced yeans. The beard is 
scanty among the more darkly pig¬ 
mented races. Sexual differences are 
involved in the distribution of hair 
on the rest of the body. 

Baldness. Alopecia or baldness in¬ 
volves temporary loss of hair due to 
various causes, or permanent loss of 


hair doe to hereditarj" causes. Tern- 
porarv falling out of hair may result 
from an mfcction or be rdated to 
certain diseases like typhoid, scarlet 
fever, pneumonia and other serious 
infections of the respiratory tract. In 
such cases, the hair may fall out sud¬ 
denly, but will be replaced in time 
without special treatment. Falling 
hair may be related to excessive 
activity of the oil glands of the hair. 

Hereditary baldness is influenced 
by sex-limited characteristics. Such 
baldness is inherited principally 
through the male as a dominaiit 
characteristic, and it is recessive in 
the female, tending to disappear if 
it occurs. Not only the baldness but 
the type of baldness is inherited. 
Once hereditary baldness appears, 
little can be done to prevent its de¬ 
velopment. Possibly the failing of 
hair in a hereditary case may be de¬ 
layed somewhat by treatment, but 
even^is is uncert^. 

Care of the hair. The hair should 
be washed often enough to keep it 
clean; for short hair at least once 
in two weeks, and for long hair every 
three weeks will usually suffice. For 
most hair any good toilet soap that 
will lather freely is satisfactory. After 
the hair has been washed with soap 
and water it should be rinsed thor¬ 
oughly and dried fairly slowly rather 
than with a hot blower. If the hair is 
too dry a sm,ali amount of oil may be 
rubbed into it after it has been 
washed and dried. 

All authorites except some barbers 
agree that singeing the hsdr does not 
accomplish anything for hair health. 
When the body is in ill health, the 

405 



HAIR REMOVER 


HALITOSIS 


hair is likely to react accordingly. 
Frequently good health and a good 
state of the skin and hair seem to be 
related. 

The problem of gray or white hair 
cannot be readily solved. Vitamins or 
other substances taken internally do 
not substantially prevent or delay the 
appearance of gray hair in families 
in which there is a tendency to early 
graying. Experts can successfully dye 
hair. Some people, however, are 
particularly sensitive to paraphenyl- 
endiamine, which is an ingredient of 
many hair dyes, and a careful hair¬ 
dresser will test the surface of the 
skin to the reaction of this chemical 
before using a dye containing it. 

Sure methods for growing hair by 
artificial stimulation are unknown. 

Superfluous hair. Hypertrichosis is 
the scientific name for excessive 
hairiness. Superfluous hair is not a 
worry to most men, but it may be a 
serious problem for a woman. 

Expert opinion inclines to the view 
that the endocrine glands, or glands 
of internal secretion, have a definite 
relationship to excessive growth of 
hair, particularly on the upper lip 
and chin of women. Certain forms of 
overgrowth of glands may be as¬ 
sociated with excessive growth of 
hair. In women excessive growth of 
hair is more likely to occur after 
they have passed the menopause. If 
a young girl has a fine mustache, 
the matter can be lightly regarded 
unless the mustache is too dark in 
color. 

For removal of superfluous hair 
three different methods are known. 
The safest and the only one generally 


recommended is the use of the 
electric needle. This requires patience 
and endurance both on the part of 
the woman undergoing the treatment 
and the doctor. In this process a 
needle or wire carrying the current is 
inserted into the hair follicle and a 
weak current turned on for a brief 
time. Only from ten to fifteen hairs 
may be removed in a single session. 
Since there may be 1200 to 1500 
hairs on the upper lip, the time in¬ 
volved is a major consideration. Even 
with the best operators, from 10 to 
50 per cent of the hairs that are re¬ 
moved recur, depending on the 
efficacy of the electric current in de¬ 
stroying the hair follicles. 

Most experts warn against removal 
of superfluous hair by x-ray. The re¬ 
sults are so uncertain and the pos¬ 
sibilities of harm so great that this 
method should not be used except 
in extreme cases. A dosage of x-ray 
sufficient to cause the hair to fall 
out is likely also to produce per¬ 
manent damage to the skin. 

Temporary measures for relief 
from excess hair are shaving, rubbing 
with pumice stone, application of 
depilatory waxes, which harden and 
are pulled off, taking the hair with 
them, and other methods. Hydrogen 
peroxide is sometimes used to bleach 
the hair so that it is not so visible. 
See also baldness; CRAB lice; depil¬ 
atory; SEBORRHEA. 

HAIR REMOVER. See depilatory. 

HALITOSIS, the scientific name for 
bad breath. The cause may be tooth 
decay; or an infection of tissue in the 
mouth, tonsils, or nose; or chronic 


406 



HEADACHE 


HEADACHE 


be can look* Tbe sbields^ worn 
across the bridge of tbe nose and 
held in place by string, bar the glare 
of tbe snn* Blackening of the cheeks 
and bridge of the nose with soot, 
charcoal, or dirty engine oU is also 
helpful in cutting down the reflection 
of the sun on the snow* 

Tight shoes are harmful in freez¬ 
ing weather and can cause damage 
to the feet Therefore, shoes worn 
in the Arctic must be big and roomy 
enough to permit the wearing of at 
least two pairs of heavy socks. If 
the shoes are not large enough, they 
should be removed and the feet 
wrapped in canvas or similar ma¬ 
terials. 

The hands must also be kept warm 
and dry. Heavy woolen inner mitts 
with windproof outer mittens should 
be worn. 

Cold metal on bare skin has been 
the cause of many serious accidents. 
Metal freezes to the skin and at 
the first burning sensation the tend¬ 
ency is to tear the part of the body 
involved away from the metal; this 
will destroy the skin. Instead, the 
metal should be thawed loose from 
the skin. 

The diet of the Eskimo fits the 
Arctic. Since it is heat-producing, fat 
is the basic element of this diet. 
Soldiers and aimien stationed in cold 
regions receive special cold-weather 
diets. Practically al fish have enough 
fat to make them good Arctic food, 
and the liver of the cod, an especially 
nourishing food, can be eaten boiled. 

Among the useful recommenda¬ 
tions for health in the Arctic are 
those concerning frostbite. Frostbite 


often develops unawrares. If the skin 
becomes stiff and grayish or whitish, 
frostbite has begun* Snow or ice are 
never to be applied under these cir¬ 
cumstances* Heat applied to warm 
the affected part gradually is bene¬ 
ficial. Any rubbing or massage must 
be avoided since this may destroy 
the tissues. In frostbite of the feet, 
shoes and coverings should be re¬ 
moved at once, and the feet wrapped 
in fur or cloth until they thaw. Thaw¬ 
ing is accompanied by a burning sen¬ 
sation and may be extremely painful. 
After frostbite the skin blisters and 
peels exactly as it does in sunburn. 
See also chilblains; frostbite. 

HEADACHE, a pain or ache across 
the forehead or within the head; it 
is not a disease but a symptom. It 
may be the result of profoundly 
complex and obscure conditions, little 
understood until recent years. 

One theory establishes three basic 
types of processes underlying head¬ 
aches; mechanical, such as blockage 
of the sinuses by infection; toxic, re¬ 
sulting from too much alcohol or 
ingestion of a poison; and functional, 
in which the parts and phenomena 
of the body involved do not manifest 
any detectable disease. Under these 
three classifications are placed alto¬ 
gether 203 separate causes of head¬ 
aches. 

A common mechanical cause of 
headaches is dilatation of the Hood 
vessels of the head by a temporarfiy 
excessive blood supply under too 
great pressure. The dEatation, in turn, 
may arise from different sources, such 
as high blood pressure or the effect of 


4II 



HEADACHE 


HEADACHE 


aa infectious disease which evokes 
outpouring of fluid in the body. 
Thus, many infections seem to be¬ 
gin with a headache. 

One of the most frequent sources 
of headache is tenseness in the mus¬ 
cles of the head and neck, sometimes 
because of local injury or a nervous 
disturbance, sometimes because of 
emotional tension. Such headaches, 
usually felt at the rear of the head 
and down into the neck, tend to re¬ 
spond well to heat and massage. 

Brain tissue itself is not sensitive 
to pain, but its coverings and as¬ 
sociated structures are capable of feel¬ 
ing pain. The brain rests within a 
membranous covering and a per¬ 
manent surrounding of cerebrospinal 
fluid. If the supply of fluid is unduly 
increased so that the membrane is 
stretched, pain results. Any other 
pressure on the membrane will have 
the same effect. The pain may come 
from an abscess in the brain or from 
incipient tumor. Sudden movements 
of the head or blows upon it may 
similarly affect the membrane cover¬ 
ing the brain or the other structures 
of the head which respond to pain. 

Persons who have headaches only 
occasionally may find them closely 
related to some experience that is also 
only occasional, such as excessive 
drinking, eating, or smoking, or ex¬ 
posure to toxic gases or other sub¬ 
stances. The actual source of pain 
is often a change m pressure wi thin 
the head due to the toxic materials. 

Inflammation of internal structure 
of the head which characterizes se¬ 
vere infections, such as encephalitis 
or meningitK, incurs acute head¬ 
ache, and inflammation following 


brain hemorrhage has the same effect. 

A seemingly general headache may 
actually come from a disorder in a 
small isolated part of the head, espe¬ 
cially from the eyes. Excessive use of 
the eyes, particularly in reading or 
workmg under glaring light, will 
induce headache. Strain and failure 
to correct defects of vision also bring 
the same discomfort. Correction of 
the causative factor generally elimi¬ 
nates the distress. 

Migraine, often called sick head¬ 
ache, designates a particular kind 
of disorder marked by its intensity, 
its association with vomiting and 
nausea, and its tendency to recur. 
Migraine is believed to be a response 
by the body to some protein to which 
it is especially sensitive which induces 
fluid and swelling vdthin the head. 
However, this kind of headache 
varies considerably from person to 
person and from time to time in the 
same person. Mental factors are 
closely related to the degree of acute¬ 
ness experienced in a migraine attack, 
as are other physical conditions in 
the body. 

In the functional headache, phy¬ 
sical cause is not detectable, nor is 
tissue change discernible even to the 
closest examination. Frequently, how¬ 
ever, it can be correlated to a mental 
or emotional disturbance. This kind 
of headache produces as much acute 
pain as if it had a clearly defined phy¬ 
sical origin. The study and treatment 
of such ailments are in the field of 
psychosomatic medicine, which ex¬ 
amines the interaction of the mind 
and body. 

Frequently headache is the most 
acute S 3 miptom of some minor \mder- 


412 



HEAD BANGING, HEAD ROLLING HEAD BANGING, HEAD ROLliNG 


lying condition, such as constipation, 
indigestion, fatigue, or menstniation. 

Headache remedies are as varied 
as the causes, and some are dangerous 
for a number of reasons. The simplest 
and most basic remedy should be 
tried first: elimiiiatioii of excesses in 
the use of alcohol and tobacco and 
food, adequate rest, and estabiish- 
inent of good hygiene relative to ex¬ 
cretion of body wastes. A large 
measure of relief may thus be effected 
without resort to drugs. 

Although the majority of com¬ 
mercial headache remedies are mild 
analgesics or pain relievers, this is 
not true of aE. Some should be ap¬ 
proached with great caution or not at 
aE. Aspirin is the least injurious. Bar¬ 
biturates, although they do reduce 
pain, may simultaneously have toxic 
effects. In addition, they induce 
drowsiness or actual sleep which can 
be undesirable or even dangerous, 
such as when driving a car. The drugs 
known as aminopyiine and Pyra- 
midon have demonstrably caused seri¬ 
ous injury to the Mood. Among other 
analgesics axe Opap, ergotamine, and 
others that must be prescribed by 
the doctor. 

A physician should be consulted 
when recurrent headache is a new ex¬ 
perience, Medical advice is also es¬ 
sential when attacks are of unusual 
severity or persistence. Sedatives and 
pain-relieving drugs merely mask 
symptoms. Expert diagnosis and de¬ 
tection of the real cause usuaEy brings 
relief. See also migraine. 

HEAD BAMGMG, HEAD ROLL¬ 
ING* Toward the end of the first year 
an otherwise normal healthy baby 


may rol! his head from side to side at 
bedtime aod also bang his head up 
and do’WQ or against his crib. Some¬ 
times this banging will be so \ioleQt 
as to cao«^e bruises on the head, or so 
prolonged as to rub the hair amny 
from the scalp. 

While parents are understandably 
disturbed by such behavior, they need 
not be alarmed. Head banging is not 
a vicious habit or a mentai or emo¬ 
tional disturbance. Neither is it asso¬ 
ciated with any organic disease. It 
seems to occur at the period when the 
baby begins to crave some rhythmic 
activity; occasionally it seems to be 
more than enjoyment and an expres¬ 
sion of development. 

A relationship has been noted be¬ 
tween head banging and an obstruc¬ 
tion in breathing, such as may be 
caused by adenoids. Removal of ade¬ 
noids is advisable and successful in 
many cases. Nevertheless, head bang¬ 
ing may continue if chronic conges¬ 
tion of the nasal passages results from 
other causes. 

Sedatives, which induce sleep 
quickly, have been found useful in 
correcting this condition, especialy 
if the chEd has a tendency to be 
tense before going to sleep. Head 
banging, under such circumstances, is 
similar to thumb sucking, a means of 
relieving tenseness. If parents or those 
who attend the baby are themselves 
tense, this may reflect on the child. 
Definite or specific suggestions to 
cure these habits have not as yet 
been developed. However, baHes out¬ 
grow the tendency to head banging 
and roEing. Cuddling and rocking a 
child to relax it (and the parent) is 
helpful and this custom is no lon^i 


4n 



HEAD INJURIES 


HEAD INJURIES 


disapproved of. The bottom and sides 
of the crib may be lined with quilt¬ 
ing for protection. In any case, head 
banging need not cause great con¬ 
cern. 

HEAP MIURIES. A head injury 
can be minor, with recovery rapid, 
or extremely severe, requiring com¬ 
plicated and prolonged treatment. 
Cuts and lacerations of the scalp, if 
they are treated promptly, heal com¬ 
paratively fast when infection and 
scarring are not present. Skull frac¬ 
tures may be severe, but healing, 
though sometimes lengthy, usually 
occurs without serious aftereffects. 
Compound fractures may sometimes 
involve meningitis, but the use of 
antibiotics has lessened this possi¬ 
bility. Simple fractures usually heal 
without complications when properly 
taken care of, 

A head injury can be extremely 
serious when the brain is exposed to 
infection or the cranial nerves are 
damaged or the brain or dura has 
actually been injured. Injuries to the 
brain may be classified as (1) concus¬ 
sion, (2) contusion, or (3) lacera¬ 
tion. Brain concussion—^that is, a 
severe shake or jolt—^is most com¬ 
mon. It produces temporary uncon¬ 
sciousness. Victims of brain concus¬ 
sion generaUy recover rapidly and 
completely. Contusion, or bruise, of 
the brain may affect the nerve centers 
in a variety of ways; it can stop or 
diminish or accelerate their functions. 
In laceration, actual damage is done 
to the brain tissue, followed by swell¬ 
ing of the brain and slowing of the 
blood supply which further damages 

414 


the tissue. After the victim has re¬ 
gained consciousness, amnesia in 
some degree may set in, depending 
on the degree of injury. Recovery 
from complete loss of consciousness 
comes in Stages; consciousness may 
be regained in minutes or, in more 
severe cases, in hours or even days. 

In serious head injuries, major 
brain functions may be paralyzed. If 
the respiratory system is paralyzed, 
death may occur immediately unless 
artificial respiration is given at once. 
Brain injuries may involve meningitis, 
hemorrhage, inflammation, and tem¬ 
porary or permanent personality and 
mental impairment. A convulsive 
seizure can occur immediately or 
months or years following the head 
injury and is more likely when the 
dura and brain have been damaged. 

Treatment of head injuries ranges 
from first-aid measures, including 
treatment for shock and keeping the 
victim immobile, to complicated sur¬ 
gery entailing prolonged hospitaliza¬ 
tion. In general the older the victim 
of a head injury is, the slower and less 
certain the recovery. Children usually 
have fewer aftereffects than adults. 
Occasionally a victim of a head in¬ 
jury will have complications after 
recovery which have a psychological 
basis. 

Repeated head injuries, as in the 
case of a boxer, provoke the condi¬ 
tion commonly called "punch drunk,” 
which is probably due to small hem¬ 
orrhages throughout the brain. It in¬ 
volves loss or impairment of such 
faculties as coordination, memory, 
concentration, vision, and hearing. 



HEAiii^G, HARDNESS OF 


HiAiT 


See also brain. 

MEARIMG, HilKBNESS OF- See 
deafness; bar; otosclerosis. 

HEART, a powerful hollow muscle 
which is the central pump of the cir¬ 
culatory system. It is pear-shaped, 
about the size of a fist, and weighs 
approximately 9 ounces. It lies in the 
chest, between the right and left 
lungs, with its narrower end pointed 
downward and to the left, where the 
heartbeat may generally be felt. The 
entire structure is enclosed in a tough 
fibrous sac, the pericardium, contain¬ 
ing a small amount of lubricating 
fluid which eliminates friction in this 
area. The pericardium also holds the 
heart in position during postural 
changes and limits the dilation of that 
organ. 

The thick muscular wall of the 
heart, the myocardium, is responsible 
for its contraction and expansion. 
The interior of the heart is completely 
lined with a thin smooth membrane, 
the endocardium, which is continu¬ 
ous with the lining of the blood ves¬ 
sels, where it is known as endo¬ 
thelium. Any inflammation of these 
tissues gives rise to the diseases 
named for them, as myocarditis, peri¬ 
carditis and endocarditis. 

The interior of the heart is divided 
into two separate cavities, similar in 
construction, but not communicating 
with each other. Each cavity contains 
two chambers, a thin-walled auricle 
above, which is the receiving depot 
for the Mood entering the heart, and 
a thick muscle-walled ventricle be¬ 
low, which pumps the blood out of 
the heart. Each chamber is provided 


with valves, arranged so that the 
blood can flow in only one direction. 
These four chambers act in com¬ 
plete unison, and their ability to 
expand and contract without stop¬ 
ping keeps the blood stream ia the 
body m perpetual motion. 

The blood which has circulated 
throughout the body enters the right 
auricle by way of tw^o large \eiiis, 
the venae cavae. This muscle con¬ 
tracts and propels the blood through 
the tricuspid valve into the right ven¬ 
tricle, which forces the blood through 
the pulmonary valve into the pul¬ 
monary artery and the lungs. Here 
the blood deposits its carbon dioxide, 
picks up a fresh supply of oxygen, 
and returns to the left auricle of the 
heart by way of the pulmonary vein. 
From there it passes through the 
mitral valve into the left ventricle, 
which contracts and sends the blood 
forward through the aortic valve into 
the arteries throughout the entire 



Heart — The aorto is the large blood vessel 
that carries the arterial blood from the left 
ventricle of the heart. From the aorta come 
all the arteries that carry blood to various 
portions of the body. 


415 



HEART 


HEART 


body. The left ventricle pumps the 
blood through the entire systemic cir¬ 
culation of the body, and accordingly 
has the strongest muscle wall. 

Both auricles contract together. 
This contraction, the auricular sys¬ 
tole, is commonly known as the 
“heartbeat.” It forces the blood into 
the ventricles, and the auricles then 
relax, or go into auricular diastole or 
dilation. During the latter part of the 
auricular diastole, and the whole 
period of the auricular systole, the 
ventricles are relaxed and fill with 
blood; this is the ventricular diastole. 
Just before the ventricular diastole 
is completed, the auricles begin to 
contract again, sending more blood 
into the ventricles. At this point the 
pressure within the ventricles in¬ 
creases, and when it exceeds the pres¬ 
sure in the large arteries that open 
from them, the ventricles contract, 
going into the ventricular systole, and 
the valves leading into the artery 
open and the blood is forced into the 
arteries. This regular rhythmic series 
of contractions and relaxations and 
the synchronous opening and closing 
of the valves is called the cardiac 
cycle. The period of rest for the two 
sets of muscles is longer than the 
work period, so that they may re¬ 
cuperate and gather fresh strength 
prior to each contraction. The ven¬ 
tricles are relaxed for a longer period 
than the auricles, since they have 
the burden of pumping. 

The rhythmic action of the heart is 
controlled by a special structure, 
composed of muscle and nerve fibers. 
These fibers are concentrated in two 
centers, or nodes, but branch off into 


fine fibers which penetrate to every 
part of the heart. One node is em¬ 
bedded in the muscular tissue of the 
wall of the right auricle, and is called 
the sino-auricular node. This is the 
pacemaker of the heart; it sends out 
the rhythmic impulses which control 
contraction of the auricles. The other 
node, the auriculo-ventricular node, 
located in the lower part of the right 
auricular wall, controls the impulses 
to the ventricles. These two nodes and 
their common bundle of fibers, 
known as the bundle of His, after 
Wilhelm His, who first described it, 
with the fine network of fibers which 
covers the inside of each ventricle, 
are the only connection between the 
right and left hearts. The coordinated 
contractions and expansions of the 
four heart chambers results in the 
heartbeat. 

The rate of the heartbeat is also 
affected by different portions of the 
nervous system, which exercise dual 
sets of controls by means of nerve 
cells or neurons, arising in the spinal 
cord and brain. Thus, heart action is 
increased by impulses sent over the 
sympathetic fibers connected to the 
spinal cord. Heart action is decreased 
by impulses sent out over the vagus, 
or wandering, nerve, one of the 
cranial nerves connected to the brain 
stem. 

When the heartbeat is accelerated, 
a sensation of fluttering or throbbing 
of the heart known as palpitation is 
felt. Any normal variations in the 
usual rh3^m may cause an awareness 
of the heartbeat, and persons who are 
acutely conscious of their cardiac 
output often complain of palpitation. 


416 



HEAtl BLOCK 


HEART MURMUR 


unless their attention can be diverted. 
This Is one of the most frequently 
encountered symptoms in anxiety 
neuroses and has no organic signifi¬ 
cance. Palpitation may also result 
from cardiac enlargement or changes 
in stroke volume or rate of the heart. 
Exercise or emotional stimulation 
cause palpitation by increasing the 
stroke volume or rate of the heart¬ 
beat. Palpitation is also one of the 
symptoms in anemia, thyrotoxicosis, 
angina pectoris, and in many of the 
conditions in which irregular cardiac 
rhythm occurs. 

Normally the heart beats about 
70 to 80 times a minute, and con¬ 
tinues to beat at this rate throughout 
life. During emotional or physical 
strain, or in fright, the beat is in¬ 
creased, sometimes to over 100 beats 
per minute. During sleep or when the 
body is relaxed, the beat decreases. 
In a life span of seventy years, the 
heart beats somewhat under three 
billion times, and pumps more than 
fifty million gallons of blood. 

The pressure of the blood within 
the arterial vessels is one of the most 
significant indications of the condi¬ 
tion of the heart, and various instru¬ 
ments are used to obtain this infor¬ 
mation. Most commonly used is the 
sphygmomanometer, which measures 
blood pressure in the arteries. 

When the heart contracts, it pro¬ 
duces electric currents in its tissues 
which are Just strong enough to reach 
the surface of the body. These cur¬ 
rents can be measured by special 
electrical instruments. The electro¬ 
cardiograph, for example, records 
them; and the recording, an electro¬ 


cardiogram, notes the coetractioo and 
relaxation of the heart and reveals 
any abnormalities, since the record¬ 
ing of the normal heart presents a 
characteristic pattern. The electro¬ 
cardiograph is used extensively in 
the diagnosis of heart disease. See 
also ANGINA pectoris; bacterial 
endocarditis; blood; blood pres¬ 
sure; cholesterol; circulatory 
system; coronary thrombosis; en¬ 
docarditis; pericarditis; rheu¬ 
matic FEVER. 

HEART BLOCK, a condition in 
which the muscular interconnection 
between the auricles and ventricles, 
the upper and lower chambers of the 
heart, is so damaged by disease that 
they beat independently. As a result, 
the pulsation of the heart is slowed, 
occurring in paroxysms or spasms. 

MEARIBURN. See indigestion. 

HEART MURMUR, sounds result¬ 
ing from vibrations produced by 
the blood coursing through the heart 
and blood vessels. These sounds may 
be normal, or may indicate some 
type of defect or injury. Murmurs 
now can be precisely characterized 
according to the type of heart defect 
that produces them. A murmur may 
by itself establish diagnosis by such 
factors as location, time of appear¬ 
ance in the cardiac rhythm, quality, 
and intensity. All kinds of murmurs 
are now recognized and have been 
described and classified by name. A 
trained physician knows how and 
where to look for them as he listens 
to a murmur in a quiet room. He 
will see to it that the child is quiet 


417 



HEART SURGERY, ARTIFICIAL HEART SURGERY, ARTIFICIAL 


too, e\ee if he most give the child 
a sedative. Experience in cardiac 
physiology and the use of the phono- 
canliogram (a tracing of the heart 
sounds) along with precise interpre¬ 
tations of x-rays and electrocardio¬ 
grams currently enable a physician 
to differentiate significant murmurs 
from one another and from an in¬ 
significant murmur which is in no 
way indicative of a cardiac defect. 

Until this type of differentiation 
became possible, many children 
With harmless murmurs were in¬ 
correctly diagnosed as having either 
congenital heart disease or rheu¬ 
matic fever. As many as 70 per 
cent of infants and children have a 
type of heart murmur now known 
as the functional or innocuous mur¬ 
mur of childhood, which has no 
bearing on congenital or acquired 
heart disorders. Children with insig- 
nificant murmurs should not be 
placed in a special category; they 
may and should live completely nor¬ 
mal unrestricted lives. 

HEART SURGERY, ARTIFICIAL, 

the surgical implantation in a pa- 
tienf s body of a mechanical or pros¬ 
thetic device that assists or entirely 
takes over some or all of the functions 

of the heart 

Artificial heart techniques are 
among the most dramatic, most prom¬ 
ising and most rapidly developing 
fields of medical research. Since dis¬ 
eases of the heart and circulatory 
system account for more than half of 
all deaths in the United States each 
year (and may contribute to as many 


as 75 per cent of them), the life-sav¬ 
ing potential of the artificial heart can 
hardly be overestimated, even though 
the technique is not beneficial in all 

such ailments. 

The successful replacement of a 
defective heart valve by an artificial 
substitute was regarded as a surgical 
milestone when it was first accom¬ 
plished m 1951. In 1966, it was a 
routine surgical technique. Plastic 
valves can now give a new lease on 
life to thousands of people who would 
otherwise be condemned to invalid¬ 
ism or death. Electronic “pacemak¬ 
ers’’ are used to regulate the heartbeat 
of persons in whom the natural heart¬ 
timing system has failed. 

The heart-lung machine, first de¬ 
veloped in 1953, has become stand¬ 
ard equipment for open heart surgery. 
This machine diverts the blood from 
its normal flow through the heart and 
lungs, performing the pumping func¬ 
tion of the heart and the oxygenating 
function of the lungs outside the 
human body to give the surgeon a 
blood-free field for open-heart oper¬ 
ations. (Technically, the heart-lung 
machine is an artificial heart, but it 
is an extremely complex electro¬ 
mechanical device which requires a 
team of highly skilled technicians 
to operate.) 

But the greatest achievement of 
prosthetic heart researchers has been 
the comparative success of the left 
ventricular by-pass, a mechanical 
pump which augments or takes over 
the function of the left ventricle, the 
heart’s main pumping chamber. (It 
would be more accurate to call the 


418 



HEAiT SURGERY, AiTIFIClAl 


device an artificial half-heart, than an 
artificial heart, since the right side of 
the heart is not affected.) 

In 1966, two operations, independ¬ 
ently performed, provided spectacu¬ 
lar evidence that the “artificial heart’' 
was at least theoretically practical. 
One patient died after four days and 
the other survived 11 days. However, 
in both cases death was due to con¬ 
ditions not directly related to the 
patients’ heart ailments, and the arti¬ 
ficial hearts functioned satisfactorily 
to the end. 

In both operative procedures, 
pumping is accomplished by period¬ 
ically squeezing the hollow plastic 
artificial ventricle at a rate adjusted 
to the patient’s pulse rate, causing 
the blood to enter the aorta in spurts, 
just as the heart does in normal con- 



Heort Surgery, Artificiai-Dr. Michael 
DeBakey, of Houston, Tex., implants left-ven¬ 
tricular by-pass in pafienfs chest. Opera¬ 
tion, performed in 1966, wos one of first to 
demonstrate workability of'’‘artificial heart.” 



Heart Surgery, Artificial — Photo at left is of plastic artificial heart. Diagram (top right] 
shows how air pump attached to chest forces blood from left atrium to aorta, so fhof blood 
bypasses left ventricle. Diagrams (bottom left and right) show how one-way action of valve 
keeps blood in blood chamber until air forces it out. Air is pumped into chamber fay ex¬ 
ternal compressor. 


419 








HEART SUiGERY, AlTIFiCIAL HEART SURGERY, ARTIFICIAL 


ditions. The squeezing power comes 
from sharp pulsations of gas pressure 
in a chamber enclosing the ventricle. 
The chamber is connected by plastic 
tubing to outside tanks of compressed 
gas. Air is used in one model, carbon 
dioxide in the other. 

Generally similar though the 
pumps are, important differences oc¬ 
cur in design, operation and the 
surgical strategy used, reflecting 
somewhat different approaches to the 
basic problem of support for a weak¬ 
ened heart. One device is designed 
for temporary assistance; its pur¬ 
pose is to take over the left ventri¬ 
cle's pumping action for an indefinite 
period until the resting heart muscle 
repairs itself to the point where it 
can function adequately again. The 
rhythm of the pressure pulses is con¬ 
trolled by an electronic timing device 
which has to be monitored continu¬ 
ously to keep it synchronized with the 
patient’s heart as his pulse rate under¬ 
goes periodic fluctuations. This ma¬ 
chine bypasses the entire left ven¬ 
tricle, taking the blood as it leaves 
the right auricle and pumping it 
directly into the aorta. 

On the other hand, the second 
device is intended as a permanent 
booster system and is therefore de¬ 
signed for almost completely auto¬ 
matic operation. Electrodes embedded 
in the heart wall pick up the minute 
electrical impulses of the heart’s 
muscular contractions, which are 
amplified and used to trigger the ex¬ 
ternal electronic timer. Blood flows 
through the heart naturally and is 
drawn into the pump from and re¬ 


turned to the aorta, obviating open- 
heart surgery to hook the pump into 
the circulatory system. The enfeebled 
natural ventricle, relieved of some 80 
per cent of its burden by the artificial 
one which pulses simultaneously with 
it, is strong enough to supply blood 
to the aorta. The wires carrying the 
timing impulse and the plastic tube 
to the air supply pass through a plug 
in the patient’s chest wall. Unlike the 
first pump, the second device oper¬ 
ates for intermittent short periods on 
a more or less permanent basis. The 
length and frequency of the “off” and 
“on” cycles depend upon the amount 
of support needed by the natural 
heart. The patient is “plugged into” 
the external control and air supply 
system through the connection in his 
chest only during the actual periods 
of operation of the pump. 

While duplication of the total func¬ 
tion of the heart naturally requires a 
more complicated device than the 
artificial ventricle, design problems 
are not significantly greater. In fact, 
life has been supported in animals 
for short but significant periods by 
complete artificial hearts. Most of the 
medical and surgical problems have 
been solved, and the way seems clear 
to the solution of the others. The re¬ 
maining obstacles are principafly of a 
technological nature. 

In a study made for the National 
Heart Institute in 1966, a number of 
leading industrial and academic re¬ 
search organizations concluded that 
such problems were well within the 
capabilities of existing technical re¬ 
sources and estimated that a workable 


420 



HEAiT TiOOBLE, SYMPTOMS OF 


HEAT SICKNESS 


artificial heart could be developed 
by 1975, 

HEART TMOUILE, SYMPTOMS 
OF. Self-diagnosis of heart disease 
can be extremely dangerous. Vir¬ 
tually every symptom of heart dis¬ 
ease may also be caused by some 
other disorder. Interpretation of 
symptoms is the function of the phy¬ 
sician, There are, of course, some 
symptoms that are warning signals 
and should promptly be reported to 
the doctor. 

Abnormal shortness of breath 
may be the first indication of dimin¬ 
ished efficiency of the heart. If this 
is noted after performance of com¬ 
mon tasks that previously did not 
cause such discomfort, heart disease 
may be suspected. This symptom, 
however, may not be due to an in¬ 
efficient heart but may be a reflec¬ 
tion of poor physical condition, 
muscular flabbiness from lack of 
exercise, prolonged rest in bed due 
to an illness, or even obesity or 
pregnancy. It may also be caused by 
other conditions such as anemia or 
disease of the lungs. 

Pain in the center of the chest 
may originate in the heart and is 
most often felt as tightness, pres¬ 
sure, or a squeezing sensation dur¬ 
ing physical effort or emotional 
distress. Pain in the left side of the 
chest is seldom due to heart disease. 
Many other conditions can simulate 
heart pain and many of these are 
of little importance. Although in 
most instances pain over the chest is 
not caused by the heart, it should be 
reported to a physician. 


Undue fatigue arismg from ac¬ 
tivity that former!) did not cause 
weariness deserves investigation of 
heart function. Obviously a great 
vanet) of conditions will produce 
this common symptom but the 
cause may be due to mefficient heart 
action. 

Swelling of both ankles and legs 
may result from congestion of the 
veins due to poor pumping action of 
the heart. This is also a common 
symptom of a variety of much more 
benign conditions such as varicose 
veins, pregnancy, and puffiness ob¬ 
served by many women a few days 
before the menses. See also Heart. 

HEAT CRAMPS* See heat sick¬ 
ness. 

HEAT EXHAUSTION* See heat 

SICKNESS. 

HEAT SICKNESS* Three specific 
conditions commonly result from ex¬ 
posure to excessive heat: (1) sun¬ 
stroke, called heatstroke if the cause 
is artificial heat; (2) heat exhaustion; 
and (3) heat cramps. Persons most 
susceptible and most likely to be se¬ 
verely affected are the very old or 
young, extremely overweight persons, 
alcoholics, and anyone who is ML 

Loss of salt from the body is the 
primary cause of heat sickness. In 
high temperatures, sweating is the 
chief way in which the temperature 
of the body is regulated, and profuse 
sweating depletes the body of large 
amounts of salt. For this reason, salt 
tablets are frequently given to men 
working in high temperatures. 

The initial symptoms of sunstroke, 
or heatstroke, are ordinarily diainess 


421 



HEATSTROKE 


HEIGHT 


and headache, diyness of the mouth 
and skin, and nausea. Uoconscious- 
ness may follow rapidly and about a 
fourth of all serious cases end fatally. 
The person’s face is flushed and the 
skin hot and dry. The pulse is rapid 
and the temperature may be as high 
as 107 or 110"^ or higher. Although 
the body is usually relaxed, convul¬ 
sions sometimes occur. 

The person should be placed on his 
back, with head slightly elevated, in a 
cool place, and his clothes removed. 
Wet cloths or ice bags should be ap¬ 
plied to cool the head. Probably the 
best method of cooling the body is to 
wrap the person in a sheet or cloth 
and pour on small amounts of cold 
water. The body should not be cooled 
too rapidly. The arms and legs should 
be massaged, through the material, 
in the direction of the heart to aid 
circulation. Another way to cool the 
body is immersion in cool water for 
about twenty minutes. Ice bags may 
also be used. The cooling treatment 
and massage should continue until 
the skin no longer appears hot and 
flushed. No stimulants should be 
given, but when conscious the person 
may have cool drinks. A doctor 
should be called as soon as possible. 

Symptoms of heat exhaustion differ 
from those of sunstroke. The face is 
pale, perspiration profuse, and the 
entire body may be clammy. The 
pulse is weak, breathing shallow, and 
weakness may be extreme. Sometimes 
a brief period of unconsciousness or 
faintiiig may ensue* Nausea, vomit¬ 
ing, dizziness, and unsteadiness are 
almost always present. 

The person should lie down, with 

422 


head level or slightly lowered, in a 
well-ventilated airy place. He should 
be lightly covered and given a half 
teaspoon of salt in about a third of a 
glass of water repeatedly until he has 
consumed about a tablespoon of salt. 
Warm coffee or tea may be drunk. If 
symptoms continue, a doctor should 
be called. 

Heat cramps are extremely pain¬ 
ful, and usually affect the muscles in 
the arms and legs or the abdominal 
muscles. Heat cramps may be ac¬ 
companied by symptoms of heat ex¬ 
haustion, and the treatment is the 
same as in heat exhaustion* A firm 
hand pressure on the affected area 
may give relief. 

To prevent heat sickness, certain 
precautions should be taken. If possi¬ 
ble, activity in extreme heat should 
be avoided or kept to a minimum. If 
it is necessary to remain in a high 
temperature, frequent rest periods 
should be observed and perhaps salt 
tablets taken. If at any time a person 
feels dizzy or nauseated, he should go 
immediately to a cool airy place. To 
maintain a proper sweat production, 
it is necessary to drink an ample 
amount of water, about twelve glasses 
a day for a person who works in a 
high temperature. Light loose cloth¬ 
ing permits evaporation of sweat, and 
a hat will protect the head, a vulnera¬ 
ble area. A good summer diet in¬ 
cludes abundant fruits, juices, and 
vegetables, and only limited amounts 
of fat food and alcoholic and iced 
beverages. 

HEATSTROKE, See heat sickness. 
HEIGHT. A person’s height is deter- 



HELiOTHEiAPY 


HEMATUilA 


mined by tbe span of the vertebrai 
trniik and the length of the bones of 
the lower limbs* 

Children's growth in height is 
inflneiiced by climate, including 
weather and sunlight, by diet, exer¬ 
cise, and posture, and particularly by 
glandular action* The growth hor¬ 
mone, secreted by the pituitary gland, 
stimulates the growth mechanism of 
the body for the first ten or fifteen 
years of life. Then the same gland 
begins to function is such a way as 
to affect the reproductive glands of 
both males and females. When a bal¬ 
ance of secretion is reached, about 
the time of adolescence, the growth 
mechanism generaUy stops and adult 
growth is achieved. 

Overactivity of the pituitary gland 
produces acromegaly or giantism. 
Underactivity of Ihe same gland re¬ 
sults in achondroplasia or dwarf¬ 
ism. 

The injection of growth hormones 
in children whose rate of growth is 
such as to indicate that they will be 
abnormally short in stature has been 
helpful. The results have been more 
effective when the injections are 
given before adolescence, because of 
the relationship between the pituitary 
and sex glands. See also achondro¬ 
plasia; acromegaly; glands; pitui¬ 
tary. 

HELIOTHERAJPYy exposure of the 
body to the rays of the sun or to ul¬ 
traviolet rays to treat disease. Treat¬ 
ment with light is generally called 
phototherapy. Infrared therapy, 
which is the use of the heat rays from 
the sun or from an artificial source, 
is a form of phototherapy. 


HEIVIAMGIOMA, a tumor composed 
of blood \essels. The growths appear 
at birth, or shortly thereafter, as red¬ 
dish or purplish stains on the skin. 
These swellings are composed cMei\ 
of capillaries at the surface. The 
blemishes may be smal or large and 
sometimes disappear spontaneously. 
They are most effectively treated 
early in life by surgical excision or 
scraping. Other forms of treatment 
include injection of chemicals, expo¬ 
sure to x-ray or radium, or the appli¬ 
cation of dry ice. 

Another form of hemangioma is 
the cavernous type. Here, spongy 
masses on the head and neck do not 
present a problem if small. However, 
if they are large, braising and bleed¬ 
ing occur easily and are serious. Im¬ 
mediate medical attention for this 
t3^e is advised. 

HEMATURIA, blood in the urine. 
This condition is abnormal and re¬ 
quires immediate medical attention. 
Usually the cause can be found, but 
in about 2 per cent of the cases blood 
in the urine is of undetermined origin. 
In such instances, the blood appears 
suddenly, apparently coming from a 
varicose vein in the urinary tract. 
The loss of blood is seldom so great 
as to cause faintness or anemia. Usu¬ 
ally this indeterminate type occurs 
in people under thirty. 

A number of possible causes of 
hematuria, all related to the urinary 
system, are known. This disease may 
result from severe infection or inflam¬ 
mation of the kidneys, or when a 
tumor of the kidneys breaks through 
a blood vessel. In addition, various 
chemicals and drugs, such as the sulfa 

423 



HEMOGLOBIN 


HEMOPHILIA 


group, may act on the tissues of the 
kidney to cause bleeding. A kidney 
stone, rupture of the kidney, bladder, 
or other portion of the urinary tract 
may induce hematuria. Blood in the 
urine may also be an indication of 
cancer of the kidney or bladder. 

A person with hematuria should be 
put to bed and the doctor promptly 
consulted. Uncontrolled or continu¬ 
ous bleeding may be critical if not 
apprehended and treated immediately 
and properly. 

HEMOGLOBIN, the red coloring 
matter in blood cells, is a protem 
consisting of hematin and globin. It 
takes oxygen from the air into the 
lungs and transports the oxygen to the 
cells of the body through the arteries. 
Hemoglobin also combines with car¬ 
bon dioxide, carrying it from the cells 
through the veins. Hemoglobin con¬ 
tains iron, which when absent from 
the diet causes anemia. 

Various devices for measuring 
hemoglobin have been developed. 
The percentage of hemoglobin in the 
red blood cells and the amount in the 
blood is measured to determine 
whether or not the blood is normal as 
it relates to this constituent. Any de¬ 
viation from the normal is an indica¬ 
tion of some form of anemia. Exces¬ 
sive destruction of the red cells 
results in jaundice. When the pigment 
appeals in the urine, the condition 
is known as hemo^obinuria. See also 
anemia; blood. 

HEMOLYHC ANEMIA. See 
anemia; blood tvees. 

HEMOPHILIA, a hereditary blood 
424 


condition in which clotting is delayed 
or does not occur, perpetually threat¬ 
ening the sufferer vsith death from 
hemorrhage. In normal persons, when 
the surface of the body is injured 
and blood escapes, the blood coagu¬ 
lates into a solid mass within five or 
six minutes, and in this way seals 
the wound. In hemophilia, the blood 
does not clot properly and the person 
may lose quantities of blood from 
even a trivial wound. The inability of 
the blood to clot is apparently in¬ 
volved with a relative deficiency of 
specific factors in the blood. Esti¬ 
mates indicate that in the United 
States between 20,000 and 40,000 
persons are affected. 

Hemophilia was first recognized in 
the eleventh century by an Arabian 
physician, Albucasis, who called it 
“bleeder’s disease.” In 1803, an 
American, John C. Otto, accurately 
described it as a hereditary disease 
which does not affect women, but is 
transmitted from the mother to her 
children. Such women, caUed carriers 
or conductors, do not themselves 
have any of the symptoms of the 
disease. If the gene is transmitted 
to a son, he may suffer from hemo¬ 
philia, and be able to pass on the 
gene to his offspring. If the gene is 
transmitted to a daughter, she in 
turn becomes a carrier, without hav¬ 
ing any s3miptoms of the ailm ent. 
Though it is believed that the daugh¬ 
ter of two parents who each carry the 
gene of hemophilia might show the 
symptoms of hemophilia, a case of a 
woman with the symptoms of hemo¬ 
philia has never been reported. 

Queen Victoria, whose ancestors 



HEMORRHAGE 


HEMORRHOIDS 


left no record of the disease, trans¬ 
mitted hemophilia to one daughter, a 
granddaughter, great-grandson, the 
czar of Russia, and to another daugh¬ 
ter, who brought it into the royal 
house of Spain. 

The first severe bleeding in hemo¬ 
philia may be controlled, but subse¬ 
quent hemorrhage may prove more 
serious. Persons with this tendency 
shoidd always report the fact before 
having a tooth extracted, or under¬ 
going the most minor surgical pro¬ 
cedures, so that transfusions of the 
proper blood type can be available. 

Any person who has hemophilia 
must avoid activity which might re¬ 
sult in injury. When hemorrhage is 
not severe, it may be controlled by 
cold compresses, by judicious pres¬ 
sure, or by local application of 
thrombin, a basic blood factor, and 
Oxycel, a commercially prepared 
agent. Transfusions of fresh blood or 
preserved plasma can shorten the 
clotting time to nearly normal. 

A recent development in this field 
has been the discovery of the missing 
factor in the blood in cases of hemo¬ 
philia and its use in controlling hem¬ 
orrhage. 

HEMORRHAGE, a flow of blood, 
such as might result from a ruptured 
blood vessel. Uncontrollable bleeding 
indicates that the blood of the pa¬ 
tient, because of some deficiency, will 
not easily clot. The supply of blood 
platelets may be less than adequate. 
Ordinarily, for every cubic millimeter 
of blood, at least 200,000 blood plate¬ 
lets are present and 50,000 are suffi¬ 
cient for for min g strong blood clots. 


If the blood contains less than this 
number, however, the person is hkely 
to bruise and bleed too easily, espe¬ 
cially from the gums, from the 
sockets of extracted teeth, from the 
nose, and sometimes from internal 
organs. Any person who shows these 
or similar symptoms should have a 
thorough examination before treat¬ 
ment. 

Normally a hemorrhage may be 
halted without excessive difficulty. A 
tight bandage of antiseptic gauze may 
be satisfactory. If a major artery is 
mvolved, as in one of the extremities, 
a tourniquet might be needed. Ex¬ 
cessive bleeding after the removal of 
a tooth can usually be controlled by 
filling the socket with gauze or by the 
application of warm water. 

In treating nosebleed, the pereon 
should lie face down, and either ice 
water or hot water applied, or the 
nostrils may be packed with gauze. 
Anyone who frequently suffers from 
nosebleed should see a physician. 
See also wounds. 

HEMORRHOIDS, or piles, swellings 
that appear at the lower end of the 
bowel on the margin of the anus. 
These are actually varicose veins and 
are classified as either external or in¬ 
ternal, depending on their location 
inside or outside the anal sphincter, 
the muscle that closes the lower end 
of the bowel. 

Hemorrhoids result from inter¬ 
ference with the flow of blood in the 
vessels of this area. A number of 
factors may be responsible, such as 
extremely sedentary habits, over¬ 
weight, constipation, or the excess 


425 



HEPATITIS 


HEPATITIS 



Hemorrliolds — Hemorrhoids, often coiled 
"plies/' are painful swellings at the anus 
Infection or strain weakens and dilates the 
walls of the veins of the rectum, causing 
blood clots to form in the vessels or sur¬ 
rounding tissue The above drawing dis¬ 
tinguishes between external and internal 
hemorrhoids Externa! hemorrhoids develop 
m the anal area outside the muscular ring 
that closes the opening Internal hemor¬ 
rhoids form inside the ring, but they may 
be pushed toward the outside and protrude 
through the muscle during bowel action 

use of cathartics. Pregnancy, too, may 
cause this condition, as may also 
congestion or cirrhosis of the liver. 

External hemorrhoids may appear 
as little folds of brownish skin pro¬ 
truding from the anus, and may pro¬ 
duce little more than itching or a 
feeling of tightness during a bowel 
movement Internal hemorrhoids 
sometimes become infected and in¬ 
flamed with consequent clotting or 
thrombosis. These may also protrude, 
and if scratched or broken bleed un¬ 
til the blood dote. 

Treatment of hemorrhoids ranges 
fixim preventive measures to erase the 
cause to surgery for hemorrhoids that 
have become intolerable. People who 
lead sedentary lives must exerdse. 
Poor circulation must be improved. 


Overweight must be corrected by re¬ 
ducing. Foods that may irritate and 
increase congestion in the blood ves¬ 
sels should be avoided or their use 
curtailed. Vinegar, spices, and coffee 
in excess are often harmful. Much 
can be done to regulate the movement 
of the bowels and a little mineral 
oil will help to soften the stool. 

Hemorrhoids may be treated by 
the application of various ointments, 
suppositories, and hot wet packs, but 
such methods are only temporary and 
not curative. Surgery to remove piles 
is a radical but effective method. 
Electrical coagulation is effective, and 
injections of compounds similar to 
those used to treat varicose veins in 
other parts of the body are also 
means of controlling and curing hem¬ 
orrhoids. 

HEPATITIS, an acute or chronic in¬ 
fectious disease of the liver, caused 
by a filterable virus. An acute form of 
the disease with s imil ar symptoms 
may appear after injection of serum, 
as was seen during yellow fever vac¬ 
cinations given in the army, and also 
following transfusion of blood or 
plasma. In these cases, a serum was 
given containmg a virus of which no 
one was aware. The disease may ap¬ 
pear after an incubation period that 
varies from forty to sixty days to as 
much as a year, and has also be¬ 
come an occupational hazard for hos¬ 
pital workers. 

In ordinary hepatitis, which devel¬ 
ops without any previous injection, 
the spread of the virus may be traced 
to water or food that has been con¬ 
taminated. Here the latent period, be- 


476 



HEREDiTY 


HiREDiTY 


fore the appearance of the disease, is 
much shorter. 

Infectious hepatitis of the ordinary 
type may be mUd, with jaundice as 
the most noticeabie symptom. Other 
symptoms preceding the jaundice 
may include loss of appetite, fever 
with or without accompanying chills, 
aching of the back, joints, or eyes. 
Sometimes the gastrointestinal tract 
is affected, with heartburn, nausea, 
vomiting, and diarrhea as possible 
symptoms. The jaundice may last for 
weeks or months and disappear 
slowly or rapidly. 

Treatment includes bed rest during 
the period of most severe jaundice, 
with a curtailment of activity for the 
duration of the disease. The diet must 
be controlled carefully and the invalid 
should be encouraged to eat since 
starvation is a special hazard to peo¬ 
ple with hepatitis. A high-protein, 
high-carbohydrate diet with few fats 
is a requisite. 

While a few people develop 
chronic low-grade liver insufficiency 
as a result of hepatitis, the majority 
are completely cured in time and the 
liver returns to its normal function¬ 
ing See also jaundice. 

HEREDITY, the congenital trans¬ 
mission of characteristics and tend¬ 
encies of parents to their oflfepring. 
Genetics, the science which deals 
with man’s origins, his mode of 
development and reproduction of 
characteristics, was given great im¬ 
petus in the nineteenth century by 
the discoveries of Darwin, Lamarck, 
Mendel, and other scientists, includ¬ 
ing John Conrad Otto, the American 


physician who &st accurately de¬ 
scribed the transmission of hemo¬ 
philia from mother to son. 

Certain physical traits are inher¬ 
ited, such as hair color and type, pig¬ 
mentation of the sldn, and color of 
the eyes. Tendencies to tallness or 
shortness are transmitted; tall parents 
generally have tall children and short 
parents have short children. Heredity 
is also accumulative; that is, many 
generations may contribute charac¬ 
teristics as well as the immediate 
parents. 

A tendency to allergies and sensi¬ 
tivity to various protein substances 
may be hereditary. Hemophilia, the 
tendency to abnormal bleeding, is 
transmitted through the female to the 
male progeny, although the female 
does not suffer from the disease. It 
has occurred notably in some of the 
royal families of Europe. Diseases 
themselves are not inherited, but pos¬ 
sibly a tendency or susceptibility to 
certain diseases can be transmitted. 
Superstitions and popffiar notions 
about the effect of a prospective 
mother’s thoughts and experiences 
on her child do not have any founda¬ 
tion in fact. 

A child does not inherit fixed traits 
or characteristics. Rather, he is bom 
with genes from both parents which 
interact to produce characteristics. 
The possibilities for interaction of 
genes are so numerous that several 
children in one family may display 
widely different traits. 

Mental instability may be mani¬ 
fested through heredity by inheri¬ 
tance of defects in the brain stmcture, 
and many states have laws controlling 





HERMAPHROD!T!SM 


HERNIA 


propagation among insane or men¬ 
tally defective people. By the same 
token, superior qualities in brain 
tissue may be transmitted. See also 
HEMOPHILIA. 

HESMAPHRODITISM, a condition 
characterized by the coexistence in 
an Individual of ovarian and testicu¬ 
lar tissue. It is extremely rare in 
human beings but more common in 
lower forms. Hermaphroditism is 
sometimes confused with pseudo¬ 
hermaphroditism. See also androg¬ 
yny. 

HERNIA, or rupture, a protrusion of 
a part-of the contents of the abdo¬ 
men through a weak spot in the 
abdominal wall, or any protrusion of 
a loop or part of an organ or tissue 
through an abnormal opening. 

Certain parts of the muscular wall 
of the body are less well reinforced 
than others. One weak point is in 
the groin along the lowest point of 
the abdomen; another is at the navel, 
and a third is in the area of the sex 
organs. When the muscle at one of 
these points separates sufficiently to 
permit part of the contents of the 
abdomen to bulge through, a hernia 
occurs. A hernia may result from any 
of many possible causes. A muscu¬ 
lar weakness may be present at birth; 
a hernia may develop in infancy from 
straining—for example, in whooping 
cough; it may result from lifting a 
heavy object or other overstraining, 
or during childbirth, or because tis¬ 
sues have not healed adequately after 
a surgical operation. 

Among several common methods 
of treatment are wearing a support 


which keeps the body material from 
passing through the opening in the 
abdominal wall; surgery in which 
the weak point is fastened and 
strengthened by surgical methods; 
and injection of an irritating sub¬ 
stance which may cause the separated 
tissues to grow together. The doctor 
will decide on the basis of his ex¬ 
amination which treatment is best 
suited to his patient. 

In infants or young persons, sup¬ 
port alone may occasionally, but not 
usually, be sufficient to permit the 
separated muscles to rejoin. In an 
older person, an inadequately con¬ 
trolled hernia usually tends to grow 
larger with time. The outward pres¬ 
sure of the internal organs gradually 
increases the size of the ruptured 
place in the muscle wall. Surgical 
repair is the most thorough and cer¬ 
tain treatment. Permanent wearing 
of a truss is a possibility, especially 
for an elderly patient. Injection, if 
effective, eliminates the need for a 
surgical operation, although it is usu¬ 
ally not as reliable. 

In surgery, the ruptured tissues are 
exposed and then sewn together, the 
stitches being placed to promote heal¬ 
ing and to create an area of strength 
at the break. The surgical technique 
which has been developed is simple 
and the risk involved is relatively 
slight. The operation often does not 
even require a general anesthetic and 
is done quite satisfactorily with local 
anesthesia. Stitches are made of new 
materials which have greater strength 
than those formerly used. The pa¬ 
tient must remain in bed for ten days 


428 



HERPES SIMPLEX 


HERPES ZOSTER 


to two weeks following the operation 
to assure complete healing. 

The danger that an unrepaired 
hernia may become strangulated is 
always present. Furthermore, as the 
protrusion of the abdominal contents 
through the muscle break becomes 
greater it may be caught by a con¬ 
striction of the muscles so that it will 
not slip back into place. Strangulation 
of a hernia is dangerous because the 
flow of blood may be partially or 
totally cut off in the strangulated part, 
threatening secondary infection, 
gangrene, and gradual death to this 
local tissue. As a consequence, the 
life of the patient is threatened. 

An infrequent type of hernia is 
that occurring in the diaphragm, the 
muscle wan separating the chest from 
the abdomen. A hernia of the brain 
indicates a bulging of the brain 
through a break in the skuU; and in 
hernia of the lung, part of the lung 
pushes through an opening in the 
chest. Hernia may affect the scrotum 
and other parts of the body. See also 

DIAPHRAGM. 

HERPES SIMPLEX, an acute virus 
disorder, commonly called “cold 
sores” or “fever blisters,” character¬ 
ized by blisters or sores which appear 
in clusters of small painful swellings 
about the lips. They frequently follow 
severe colds, pneumonia, malaria, or 
other acute conditions with fever. Al¬ 
though usually confined to the lips, 
herpes simplex may occur on the con¬ 
junctivas, corneas, or on the genitals. 
The swellings develop into watery 
blisters which break, form a crust, 
and eventuafiy heal. 


Fever blisters are associated with 
digestive upsets, emotional disturb¬ 
ances, allergic reactions, and, in some 
women, with menstrual irregularities. 
Herpes simplex is usually mild and 
limited to one area, and ordinarily 
disappears within a week or ten days. 
Applications, such as zinc ointment 
or calamine lotion, on the affected 
area may relieve pain and swelling. 

HERPES ZOSTER, also known as 
shingles, a fairly common virus dis¬ 
ease found most frequently in adults. 
It usually occurs during the spring 
and autumn. The word zoster is de¬ 
rived from the Greek, meaning girdle. 
The condition is characterized by the 
appearance of clusters of large pain¬ 
ful blisters nmning in a bandlike pat¬ 
tern on patches of reddened skin. 
The rash follows the course of one 
or more of the cutaneous nerves that 
transmit sensation to the skin. Gen¬ 
erally only one side of the body is 
involved, though it may affect nerves 
leading to the eyes or other vital 
structures. When the eye is affected, 
blisters form not only on the fore¬ 
head and eyelids but sometimes even 
on the eyeball itself. This condition 
requires expert attention. 

Shingles (derived from cingulum, 
tneaning belt) is most apt to occur 
when body resistance is low. It is 
usually preceded by severe smarting 
pain in the involved area and a 
general feeling of indisposition, with 
perhaps some respiratory or digestive 
disturbances for three to four days 
before the rash appears. The patches 
of blisters may persist for a week or 
two, then dry up and be covered with 


429 



HICCUPS 


HISTOPLASMOSIS 


shingle-like scabs. The same virus 
that causes herpes zoster may also be 
responsible for chickenpox. 

In treating herpes zoster, efforts are 
made to relieve pain and prevent any 
secondary infection of the blisters. 
Aureomycin has proved helpful and 
cortisone is frequently used. 

HICCUPS, or hiccoughs, result from 
spasmodic contractions of the dia¬ 
phragm caused by irritation of the 
phrenic nerve that controls this broad 
muscle which separates the chest 
from the abdomen. The time-honored 
cure is simply to hold the breath 
as long as possible, and if this fails 
to swallow cold water or gargle while 
holding the breath. Other popular 
treatments include coughing or the 
inducement of sneezing, swallowing 
ice or vinegar, or putting a pinch of 
salt on the back of the tongue. 
Breathing into a paper bag accumu¬ 
lates carbon dioxide and is sometimes 
effective in stopping hiccups. If these 
methods fail, a doctor should be 
called. The application of an ice pack 
to the neck, the use of ethyl chloride 
sprayed on the abdomen to lower the 
temperature, or pressure on the eye¬ 
balls or on the ribs near the place 
where the diaphragm connects may 
be effective measures. Narcotics are 
sometimes administered and it may 
even be necessary to anesthetize those 
with hiccups. In extreme cases, an 
operation may be required. 

HIGH BLOOD PRESSURE. See 

BLOOD PRESSURE, HIGH. 

HISTAMINE. See allergy. 
HISTOPLASMOSIS. A disease 
430 


closely resembling coccidioidomy¬ 
cosis, histoplasmosis is probably the 
second most significant systemic fun¬ 
gus disease. The fungus histoplasma 
capsulatum grows chiefly in moist 
soil and the disease is acquired by 
inhaling the airborne spores of the 
fungus. Men are more often affected 
than women, and children of both 
sexes seem to be more susceptible to 
this mold than to any other mycotic 
infection. 

At one time, histoplasmosis was 
considered to be rare and usually 
fatal. During the past two decades, 
however, it has become evident that 
the mold is also responsible for a 
milder form of the disease which has 
affected many thousands of people 
living in the central portions of this 
country, principally around the val¬ 
leys of the Mississippi, Missouri, and 
Ohio rivers. At times the disease has 
reached almost epidemic proportions. 

The mild phases of the infection 
involve the skin or lungs, beginning 
like a grippe or atypical pneumonia. 
Small localized ulcers appear in the 
mouth or ear and enlargment of the 
lymph nodes in this area may also be 
noted. The more advanced form re¬ 
veals enlarged spleen and liver, se¬ 
vere anemia, and emaciation and 
irregular fever. 

The majority of these infections 
heal spontaneously and drugs and an¬ 
tibiotics are of little help. Since the 
fungus has been found in the sod, 
in animal excreta around bams and 
chicken coops, persons whose work 
brings them in contact with these 
sources should be particularly careful 
to observe sanitary precautions. 



HIVES 


HOARSENESS 


should always wash their hands be¬ 
fore eating, and if possible wear 
gauze masks to prevent inhalation of 
spores. See also cocciDionxiMYCOSis; 
FUNGUS. 

HIVES, or urticaria, a condition in 
which whitish elevated areas, pain¬ 
fully itching, appear on the surface 
of the skin. 

These eruptions may follow the 
eating of certain foods, or exposure 
to particular atmospheric conditions. 
Theoretically these or other physical 
influences can alter the chemistry of 
the skin so that the absorption of cer¬ 
tain substances will produce the rash. 
Psychological factors, however, may 
also cause the appearance of hives. 

Hives often appear and disappear 
within the space of hours, but may 
persist for longer periods, become 
chronic, or recur persistently. Most 
frequently they will disappear after 
several days imless the person irri¬ 
tates or infects them—for example, 
by scratching. 

The obvious first step in the treat¬ 
ment of this annoying malady is to 
locate the specific source. If this can 
be done, and if the cause, perhaps 
a type of food, can be eliminated, 
control of the disease should not be 
difficult. The person is advised to 
avoid chocolate, cocoa, nuts, peanut 
butter, shellMi, fish, tomatoes, fresh 
pork, fresh fruits, and spices. 

Frequently a person may be de¬ 
sensitized to the food which makes 
him susceptible to hives. For example, 
the extract of shellfish can be ad¬ 
ministered in increasing amounts un¬ 
til the patient is able to eat this food 
without ill effect. Antihistamines have 



Hives—Giant hives of both eyes m a young 
girl who presents marked dermographism 
and hives The wheals seen in a case of 
hives are caused by an accumulation of 

fluid m the tissues 

also been used to control the suscep¬ 
tibility to hives. In acute urticaria, 
the condition usually can be promptly 
controlled by injection of epinephrine 
hydrochloride. Severe cases also re¬ 
spond to treatment with ACTH, 
cortisone, or metacorten. 

For temporary relief of the itch- 
mg, certain antihistamine and hydro¬ 
cortisone lotions or powders are 
available. Physicians often prefer the 
powder form, since it serves not 
only to relieve the itching but also to 
dry the affected area. Anyone suscep¬ 
tible to changes in temperature 
should select his clothes with a 
thought to the climate. Any garment 
which heats the skin or produces 
perspiration should be eliminated, 
since it will undoubtedly affect the 
infection and iutensify the itching. 

HOARSENESS, an unusual huski- 

431 



HODGKiN^S DISEASE 


HODGKIN'S DISEASE 


ness or harshness of voice, usually 
due to excessive strain on the vocal 
cords, the result, perhaps, of exces¬ 
sive drinking, smoking, speaking, or 
smging. If the person will permit 
himself a rest period of several days, 
during which he does not speak 
above a whisper, recovery is usually 
prompt. 

Occasionally, if the hoarseness per¬ 
sists, a careful examination by a 
throat specialist is advisable. In 
singers, actors, and public speakers, 
certain small nodules sometimes ap¬ 
pear on the vocal cords, the result 
of excessive strain. 

Often a general physical checkup 
may be recommended, since the 
hoarseness may derive from a con¬ 
stitutional illness. Ordinarily nothing 
worse than a cold is encountered, or 
a nasal or sinus infection. Occa¬ 
sionally, however, hoarseness can be 
a valuable warning sign which points 
to a more serious malady, such as 
tuberculosis, cancer, or syphilis. 
Nowadays, with early diagnosis, 
these diseases are often curable. See 
also LARYNGITIS. 

HODGKIN’S DKEASE, an ailment 
which involves the lymph glands. 
Thomas Hodgkin, an English physi¬ 
cian, first reported it in 1832 as 
^^muitiple swellings of the lymph 
glands.” The disease is fairly wide¬ 
spread throughout America and 
Europe and is believed to be increas¬ 
ing. It is most common in men be¬ 
tween the ages of twenty and forty, 
although it has been reported in older 
people. 

Hodgkin’s disease is sometimes 
432 


preceded by an infection of the teeth 
or tonsils, but a direct connection 
has not been established. It usually 
begins with an enlargement of the 
lymph nodes on one side of the neck, 
sometimes accompanied by fever. 
The swelling then spreads to the 
glands on the opposite side of the 
neck. The nodes are not painful or 
tender, vary in size, and can be felt 
as separate movable masses. They 
grow slowly and in the early stages 
there are no indications of other 
changes in the body. Sometimes a 
generalized itching or eruption of the 
skin occurs which causes great dis¬ 
comfort. 

As the disease develops, the spleen 
and sometimes the liver are often en¬ 
larged, and frequently the bone mar¬ 
row is affected, causing secondary 
anemia. When the process reaches 
the vertebrae and spinal cord, a 
paralysis of the lower part of the 
body results. These symptoms are ac¬ 
companied by a loss of weight and 
the patient appears to be in extreme 
ill health and wasting away, a condi¬ 
tion called cachexia. As other glands 
in the body become enlarged, they 
press in on neighboring organs. 
Coughing and chest pains are caused 
by compression m the chest, and pres¬ 
sure on the trachea or surrounding 
structures makes breathing and swal¬ 
lowing painful and difficult. The con¬ 
dition gradually becomes generalized. 

Treatment consists of x-ray for 
the localized enlargements. When the 
swellings are widespread, nitrogen 
mustard is used in addition to the 
radiation of selected areas. Cortisone 
and ACTH have been effective in 



HOMOSEXUALITY 


HORMONES 


temporarily reducing the size of the 
spleen and lymph nodes. The periods 
of relief vary and are unpredictable. 
They may last for a week, or from 
two to several months, and in rare 
cases for as long as a year. Treatment 
reduces the size of the large tumor 
masses, and thus lessens the pressure 
on the surrounding nerves, giving the 
patient considerable relief from pain 
and discomfort. In view of the pos¬ 
sible toxic effects of the treatment 
on the bone marrow, repeated blood 
counts must be made at regular in¬ 
tervals, and antibiotic treatment as 
well as blood transfusions are held 
readily available. Known treatment, 
however, can provide temporary re¬ 
lief, but does not effectively halt the 
progress of the disease. 

HOMOSEXUALITY, sexual attrac¬ 
tion toward persons of one’s own sex 
rather than the opposite sex. In 
females it is called lesbianism. In 
psychoanalysis the term can also 
include sexual interest which does 
not receive genital expression. 

The causes of homosexuality are 
extremely complex and dfficult to 
ascertain, and science or psychiatry 
have only partial answers to the 
treatment of the problem. This de¬ 
viation from normal heterosexuality 
may develop at puberty. A lack of 
hormones, or such emotional factors 
as a father complex in the female 
adolescent, or a similar identification 
toward the mother in the male ado¬ 
lescent, may be the basis of homo¬ 
sexuality. 

HOOKWORM. See worms. 


HORMONES. A hormone is a sub¬ 
stance produced by one of the inter¬ 
nal secretion or endocrine glands 
which exerts a specific effect else¬ 
where in the body on some other 
gland or organ. Other glands also 
secrete special substances, such as the 
sweat of the sweat glands, the milk 
of the mammary glands or breasts, 
and the saliva of the salivary' glands. 
The products of these glands of ex¬ 
ternal secretion, however, as con¬ 
trasted with those of internal secre¬ 
tion, do not have regulatory effects 
on other organs. 

The pituitary gland produces sev¬ 
eral of the most important hormones. 
It secretes a growth hormone which 
produces human growth, a hormone 
stimulating the development of the 
sexual organs, hormones regulating 
the thyroid gland, the adrenal cortex, 
and other important internal secre¬ 
tions. 

Some glandular parts of the body 
produce both external secretions and 
hormones. The pancreas, for in¬ 
stance, provides the body with both 
insulin, an internal secretion or hor¬ 
mone regulating the body’s use of 
sugar, and trypsin, an external secre¬ 
tion involved in the digestion of pro¬ 
tein foods. 

Hormones and the ^ands in which 
they originate constitute an organized 
system for regulating many funda¬ 
mental bodily processes in a coordi¬ 
nated way, including growth, repro¬ 
duction, mobilization of defenses 
against stress and many forms of 
disease, and also basic aspects of 
metabolism, such as the use of oxy¬ 
gen and sugar. 


433 



HOUSEMAlD^S KNEE 


HYGIENE 


Ie receat years, ACTH and other 
honnones of the cortical group have 
been produced from animal pitu- 
itaries and made available to the 
medical profession for therapeutic 
use in a wider variety of diseases. 
See also glands; pituitary. 

HOUSEMAWS KNEE. See knee. 

HYDROCEPHALUS, commonly 
called water on the brain, a condition 
in which large amounts of cerebro¬ 
spinal fluid are around or within the 
brain. Normally this fluid flows 
through the ventricles of the skull and 
is drained off by the venous sinuses. 
An excess of the fluid or inefficient 
drainage, which may be caused by 
blocking of the drainage canal by in¬ 
flammation or by a tumor, will pro¬ 
duce hydrocephalus. Obstructions 
may also exist at birth due to mal¬ 
formation of the internal portions of 
the skull concerned with proper 
drainage. 

Slight cases of hydrocephalus do 
not present any difficulties. However, 
if the amount of fluid is great, the 
compression may impair the mental 
faculties and an operation may be 
necessary. The operation involved 
may be one of several kinds, de¬ 
pending on the nature of the obstruc¬ 
tion. In any case, the operation is 
delicate and often severe, requiring 
special x-ray examination before¬ 
hand. 

HYDROCORTISONE. See corti¬ 
sone. 

HYDROPHOBIA. See rabies. 
HYGIENE, the science that con¬ 


cerns itself with rules of health, both 
public and private, and with the 
methods of achieving good health by 
following these rules. The person 
who wishes to enjoy good health 
should observe the following general 
principles of hygiene. 

Fresh air is important and care 
should be taken that rooms are wel 
ventilated and adequate time is spent 
out-of-doors. Avoid overweight or 
underweight by having a well-bal¬ 
anced diet which includes the proper 
nutrients. Eat leisurely, chewing the 
food thoroughly. Be sure to drink six 
to eight glasses of water each day. 
Regular daily elimination is necessary 
to rid the body of waste products. 
Appearance and health are both im¬ 
proved by correct posture. 

Mental attitude is an important 
aspect of hygiene. As an aid to 
health, no drugs or medicine can 
fully replace a calm mature outlook 
on life. 

Cleanliness is the first and most 
essential step in maintaining health. 
Cuts, scratches, and bruises should be 
given prompt attention to avoid in¬ 
fection and other complications. 
Good personal hygiene requires 
special attention to certain parts of 
the body. Hands and fingernails 
should be kept clean and weE 
groomed. The teeth should be 
brushed with a suitable dentifrice at 
least twice a day. Persons who wear 
artificial dentures or plates may find 
it desirable to wash the teeth and den¬ 
tures after each meal. Medicated 
mouthwashes and gargles are not 
especiaUy recommended. The ears 
should be cleaned by syringing gently 


434 



HYMEN 


HYPERIRiCHOSIS 


with warm water, being careful not 
to direct the force of the stream 
against the eardrum. Never use a 
hard or pointed object which could 
damage the eardrum. Remove excels 
matter from the nose with a soft 
handkerchief or tissue. The eye which 
is self4iibricatiiig and self-adjusting 
seldom requires eye solutions. Be¬ 
yond routine cleansing, any condi¬ 
tion of the ears, nose, or eyes re¬ 
quiring special treatment should be 
cared for by a physician. 

A yearly physical examination by 
a doctor and a semiannual dental 
checkup are recommended. 

Hygienic measures relating to the 
community, such as sewage disposal, 
potable water, and insect control, are 
usually in the hands of public au¬ 
thorities and agencies. However, to 
be fully effective, public hygiene must 
be developed and carried out with 
the cooperation of every citizen in 
the community. See also bathing; 
nutrition; Feminine Hygiene. 

HYMEN, or maidenhead, the mem¬ 
brane found at the opening of the 
vagina, partially Mocking the entrance 
to the female sex organs. Although 
its presence is usually considered a 
sign of virginity, occasionally it may 
be entirely lacking or it may be rup¬ 
tured by strain, such as occurs during 
horseback riding. 

HYPimCIBITY, excessive secre¬ 
tion of gastric juice, which may 
appear in a temporary disturbance 
of the digestion or be present in 
chronic gastritis or in gastric or 
duodenal ulcers. Hyperacidity is re¬ 
lated to the hunger pain of duodenal 


uicei. Ls IS c\iJenced when the paie 
IS rdieved toPowing the neutidi/a- 
tion of the add with alkalies Heait- 
bum and belching are also cafised h\ 

h\peracidit\. 

HYFERHYDEOSIS, the scien!P'.^c 
name for e\cessi\e sweating. i 

PERSPIRATION. 

HYPERTENSION. SVt BLCiuD r»RLN^ 

Si RE, HIGH. 

HYPERTRICHOSIS. Excess hair 
lo areas not usually hair> is calied 
hypertrichosis or hirsutism. This can 
be a most disturbing affliction for 
young girls and women, especialK 
when it occurs on the face. There 
seems to be a tendency for super¬ 
fluous hair to mn in certain families. 
In women and children, the en¬ 
docrine system is sometimes im¬ 
plicated, especially the OAaries, as 
well as the adrenal and pituitary 
glands. Chronic irritation of the 
skin may also cause an excessive 
growth of hair. 

if a physician can discover an 
underlying endocrine disorder, then 
the treatment should, of course, be 
directed toward correcting this. If 
not, the best local treatment is to 
destroy each individual hair follicle 
by electrolysis. This must be done, 
however, by persons adequately 
trained in this procedure or infec¬ 
tions and permanent scars can re¬ 
sult. Shaving and using depilating 
waxes are satisfactory, especially for 
excessive hair growth on arms and 
legs. Many depilatory preparations 
are now available containing chemi¬ 
cals capable of dissolving the hair. 


435 



HYPEiTROPHY 


HYPOCHONDRIASIS 


It IS important to follow directions 
accompanying these products most 
carefully or they may cause skin ir¬ 
ritations. If the superfluous hair is 
of a fine texture, bleaching it with 
peroxide will often prove satisfac¬ 
tory. Under no circumstances 
should x-ray be used. Too many 
women today show serious burn 
scars caused by the misuse of x-ray 
for removal of hair. 

HYPERTROPHY, disproportionate 
growth of any organ or tissue of the 
body. Vigorous exercise of the mus¬ 
cles can cause enlargement and bulg¬ 
ing. Certain conditions in the heart 
may cause enlargement of hypertro¬ 
phy, as when an improperly function¬ 
ing valve impedes the outflow of 
blood from the chambers of the 
heart. Enlargement of the breasts is 
a common form of hypertrophy and 
may occur in both males and females, 
young or old. A compensatory hy¬ 
pertrophy may occur, as in the case 
of the loss of a kidney; then the 
other kidney tends to grow larger to 
make up for the one that is lost 
and even to take up some of its 
functions. 

HYPNOSIS, a state of sleep or trance 
induced in a person by means of 
verbal suggestion by a hypnotist or 
by concentration on some object. 

In hypBoanalysis, hypnosis is em¬ 
ployed by the psychoanalyst to un¬ 
cover the unconscious drives and 
mechanisms of the personality of the 
patient in an effort to analyze the 
causes of Ms emotional conflicts in 
the conscious state. The person may 


seem to be asleep after the hypnotist 
has induced the trancelike state and 
in this state he remains responsive 
to ideas suggested by the hypnotist. 
The unconscious mind is then ex¬ 
posed, repressed ideas or experi¬ 
ences recalled which have a bearing 
on the person’s emotional disturb¬ 
ance, and a relationship later estab¬ 
lished to the conscious personality. 

Narcosynthesis is a technique 
based on the same principle, but 
drugs are used rather than hypnosis. 
Here the hypnotic drug is intro¬ 
duced intravenously to induce the 
state wMch will reveal the underly¬ 
ing emotional conflict. This state is 
then followed by discussion. This 
form of psychoanalysis has particu¬ 
larly been used to treat neuroses re¬ 
sulting from war experiences. 

Hypnosis is sometimes useful in 
dealing with drug addiction, dipso¬ 
mania, or other injurious habits or 
impulses. Disorders such as in¬ 
somnia, diarrhea, or constipation, 
due to nervous influences, have re¬ 
sponded to this form of treatment. 
Certain menstrual irregularities re¬ 
lated to a disturbed emotional state 
have also been treated by hypno- 
analysis. 

Hypnosis should be practiced 
only by those who are skilled and 
under medical supervision. 

HYPOCHONDRIASIS. A person 
who is constantly concerned with 
his health or believes he is suffering 
from a serious disease, without 
factual basis, is known as a hypo¬ 
chondriac. The condition of mor¬ 
bid fear is called hypochondriasis. 


436 



HYPOTENSiON 


HYSTERECTOMY 


In true hypochondriasis, the per¬ 
son’s fears are related to the func¬ 
tioning of one particular organ of 
the body—the lungs, kidneys, heart, 
eyes, or digestive tract. Some 

women constantly develop im¬ 
aginary symptoms concerning the 
organs of childbirth. A hypochon¬ 
driac can mistake the slightest 

cough for a sign of tuberculosis. If 

the gastrointestinal tract is the 
center of anxiety, the interrelation¬ 
ship of the mind and the functions 
of the organs is such that certain 
symptoms can actually develop as 
a result. Loss of appetite, nausea, 
vomiting, fuEness of stomach, and 
belching after meals are a few of 
such symptoms which may develop 
without physical cause. 

The hypochondriac may be so 
beset with fears and symptoms that 
frequently the cure demands much 
time and patience. Persuasion that 
his fears are groundless is not 
sufficient to convince such a person. 
Psychotherapy is helpful, but again 
such treatment is slow. Persons suf¬ 
fering from hypochondriasis to a 
lesser degree have been helped 
sometimes by turning attention from 
the subject of health to new in¬ 
terests. Older people have most 
frequently responded to this type of 
treatment. 

HYPOTENSION* See blood pres¬ 
sure, LOW. 

HWOTHYROIDISM, any con¬ 
dition characterized by deficient 
activity of the thyroid gland and its 
secretion, thyroxin. 


WTien such a condition occurs in 
a child before it is born, the infant 
wifi he retarded in both physical 
and mentdi development, and will 
grow to be a dwart of low menial 
capacity, termed a cretin. The same 
deficiency may arise spontaneously 
in later life, leading then to what is 
called myxedema. Abnormal tissue 
develops beneath the skin of the 
face, arms, and legs, ghing a puffy 
appearance. The person becomes 
lethargic, mentally as well as physi¬ 
cally. Sometimes this condition de¬ 
velops after surgical or other treat¬ 
ment for hyperthyroidism, when the 
remaining amount of thyToid tissue 
is insufficient for the body. 

Treatment of aE these conditions 
is by administratioE of thyroid sub¬ 
stances, such as thyroid extracts, and 
thyroxin, which are taken daily by 
mouth. Only the physician should 
prescribe such treatment and de¬ 
termine the amounts to be taken, 
because of the dangers involved. See 
also cretinism; goiter; myxedema. 

HYSTERECTOMY, medical term 
for removal of the womb or uterus. 
The presence of a tumor or any of 
a variety of other conditions de¬ 
termines the desirabEity of a hyster¬ 
ectomy. Whether or not one or 
both of the ovaries, the female sex 
glands, or the FaEopian tubes, 
which transport the egg ceE from 
the ovary to the womb each month, 
should be removed at the same time 
depends on whether or not those 
organs are dfeordered in such a way 
as to require it. 

The ovaries, especiaEy through 

437 



HYSTERIA 


HYSTERIA 


their intemai secretions or hor¬ 
mones, are fundamental to a 
woman’s health. Removal of the 
ovaries induces menopause or change 
of life, a serious development which 
may require administration of the 
missing hormones for a long time un¬ 
til the patient’s body adjusts. Accord¬ 
ingly, if the ovaries are healthy, the 
doctor will not include them in a 
hysterectomy without compelling rea¬ 
sons. Among the most common of 
such reasons is the existence of cysts, 
encapsulated collections of fluid 
glandular material, which sometimes 
grow to unwieldy size and cause great 
discomfort. The ovaries may also be 
affected by tumors and infections in 
such a way as to make removal neces¬ 
sary. Since the ovaries supply the 
female body with the vital female 
sex gland secretions or hormones, 
elimination of the uterus alone will 
not disturb the regular onset of 
menopause. The womb is simply an 
organ to cradle the developing em¬ 
bryo and child until birth; it does 
not by itself secrete hormones. Re¬ 
moval of the womb does, however, 
permanently stop menstruation. 

Hysterectomy, which is under¬ 
gone by thousands of women every 
year in the United States, is defi¬ 
nitely a major operation, requir¬ 
ing anesthesia, a stay in the hospital, 
and a period of careful convales¬ 
cence to permit the tissues affected 
to mend adequately. Heavy ex¬ 
ercise and lifting are not advisable 
and ample rest is necessary. The 
choice of the two surgical methods 
used will depend on the condition 

438 


of the individual patient and the 
judgment of the gynecologist. Al¬ 
ternative routes, either of which 
may be used, are through the lower 
opening of the body, the vagina, or 
through the abdomen. 

A common question of women 
who must undergo hysterectomy is 
whether or not the operation will 
disturb or stop regular marital re¬ 
lations. The answer is a definite nega¬ 
tive. Once the postoperative repair 
has begun and healing is complete, 
marital relationship continues undis¬ 
turbed. 

HYSTERIA, a psychoneurotic dis¬ 
order, involving intense emotional¬ 
ism with various psychic and physi¬ 
cal disturbances. It often results 
from repressed conflicts within the 
person, and occtirs most frequently 
in young women. Irregularity of be¬ 
havior is often thought to be hys; 
teria. Most people think of a hys¬ 
teric as a person alternately crying 
and laughing in an excited and dis¬ 
tracted manner. The concept of hys¬ 
teria was not understood, however, 
until the introduction of the psycho¬ 
analytic approach by Freud. There 
are many varieties of hysteria. In 
the ordinary course of experience, 
the tantrum type of hysteria may be 
encountered, in which the person 
may cry, shout, walk about aim¬ 
lessly, or even attack a friend. In 
another, more serious type, the per¬ 
son may not talk or move or hear 
what is said to him. First-aid meas¬ 
ures, such as slapping the victim or 
throwing water into his face, may 
be effective; but if symptoms are 



HYSTEilA 


HYSTERIA 


severe, relief of hysteria requires 
expert medical advice. 

Aeother dramatic manifestation 
of hysteria is the falling fit, which 
may resemble an attack of epilepsy. 
However, certain signs mill indicate 
real hysteria: the person iisiially 
does not hurt himself in falling, and 
does not bite Ms tongue or have 
other symptoms of epilepsy; a 
certain degree of consciousness of 
action is present in the hysteric. 
Strange behavior may be manifested 
in hysteria, relating to such activities 
of everyday existence as eating, 
sleeping, working, memory, and 
conversation. The hysteric, being ex¬ 
tremely impressionable, may also 
imitate symptoms of many diseases. 

The development of hysterical 
paralysis may involve a single limb 
or perhaps half of the body, a con¬ 
dition known as hemiplegia. Certain 
signs aid the experienced observer 
to distinguish between paralysis due 
to a definite organic cause such as 
apoplexy and a hysterical semi¬ 
paralysis. 

In all types of hysteria in which 
real organic damage is not present, 
definite psychological causes are the 
source and are known as conversion 
reactions. Whatever the manifesta¬ 
tion, the development indicates that 
the person to some degree has lost 
a sense of Ms own identity, and is 
seeking refuge in hysterical symp¬ 
toms as a device to obtain attention 
or sympathy. Disappointment in 


Ime or some other deep iriistriifion 
are examples of emotional iipscf 
\^hidi may stimofaie a h'^sierlca! 

atuck. 

Shell shock or e\en hliedoess are 
forms of hysteria manifested in 
soldiers who may be seeking to 
escape an intolerable situation. 

in the treatment of hysteria the 
diagnosis must be certain. Failure to 
detect and distinguish between a 
real physical cause and one of 
terical origin may be extremely 
serious. 

Sometimes a person who for 
years has been blind or deaf may 
suddenly recover the lost sense in 
what is apparently a miraculous 
cure. Similarly people confined to 
bed for months because they are un¬ 
able to walk or stand may unex¬ 
pectedly leap from the bed if 
shocked by a startling alarm. 

A hysterical person is unduly 
open to suggestion and just as he 
may simulate symptoms that are 
prompted by well-meaning but in¬ 
judicious friends, so Ms craving for 
sympathy will make Mm respond 
to friendly psychotherapy, which is 
the most effective form of treat¬ 
ment. When the victim of hysteria 
is made to understand the basis of 
his disturbance, the cure of the 
symptoms may be as sudden as the 
onset. The deeper attitudes and 
motivations of the person must be 
understood to effect a real cure of 
hysteria. 


439 



iCE CAP, or ice bag, used when a 
dry cold application is required to 
relieve pain, aSect the blood supply 
to a given area, or lower tem¬ 
perature to promote healing, A 
rubber hot-water bottle filled with 
crushed ice, a rubber or plastic bath¬ 
ing cap or a glove filled with ice 
and tied at the top may be used if 
an ice bag is not available. 

ICHIHYOL, the proprietary name 
for a sulfonated coal tar derivative. 
Ichthyol is used in ointment or 
lotion form for the treatment of a 
number of sMn disorders such as 
acne rosacea, erysipelas, eczema, 
psoriasis, etc. It may also be taken 
internally in the form of pills or as 
a mixture in the treatment of rheu¬ 
matism and certain respiratory dis¬ 
orders. In certain inflammatory pel¬ 
vic disorders it is used as a vaginal 
suppository. Recently it has been 
largely replaced by remedies having 
more specific action. 

ICHTHYOSIS, a disorder of the 
440 


skin characterized by dryness and 
extreme scaliness, which gives it the 
common name of “fish skin dis¬ 
ease.” It is a congenital disease; 
babies are born with scaly skin 
or it appears in the early months of 
life. 

Its cause is not definitely known, 
although it is believed that a dietary 
deficiency may be responsible. Nei¬ 
ther is there any specific treatment 
for its cure. The general health of 
the child is not affected, nor is 
there any itching. 

Frequent warm baths to remove 
the scales and emollients to over¬ 
come dryness help to mitigate the 
condition. Complete cures have been 
known to occur spontaneously in 
connection with healing other chil¬ 
dren’s diseases such as measles. In 
most cases, unfortunately, ichthyo¬ 
sis may persist throughout the life¬ 
time. 

ICTERUS. See jaundice. 

IDIOT. See feeble-mindedness. 



ILEiliS 


IMMUNITY 


ILEITIS. Chrooic inflammatioo m 
that portioa of the small intestine 
known as the ilenm may produce a 
partial obstnictioii which grows 
progressively worse* This comes 
from scar tissue formation such as 
may be caused by tuberculosis and 
other causes. 

Crohn's disease, named for the 
doctor who discovered it, or re¬ 
gional ileitis, is a condition of un¬ 
known cause that may result in 
severe scarring and inflammation 
with chronic obstruction and often 
in formation of fistula. 

The symptoms include cramps or 
colicky pain following meals. Fever 
and diarrhea often accompany this 
condition, and there is weakness and 
general signs of debility. Anemia 
may also accompany this disease. 

The condition can be managed by 
careful attention to diet, medical 
treatment, and a sympathetic ap¬ 
proach where the emotional state 
of the patient is a complicating 
factor. The disease may progress to 
a point where surgery is required to 
resolve the condition. Postoper- 
atively patients may continue to 
have occasional diarrhea, but other 
symptoms clear up completely and 
in dramatic fashion. In about 15 
per cent of the cases, the condition 
may reappear within six years and 
quite close to the site of the original 
obstruction. 

IMBECILE. See feeble-minded¬ 
ness. 

IMMUNITY^ the state of being 
temporarily or permanently able 
to resist an infection. Immunity to 


a disease exists when the antibodies, 
substances which combat in\ading 
microorganisms and their toxic 
effects, agamst that particijiar dis¬ 
ease are present in the bod>. The 
antibodies may be present for sev¬ 
eral reasons: (1) the person has had 
the disease once and developed the 
antibodies; (2) the antibodies have 
been artificially presided by inducing 
the body to produce them; f3) the 
antibodies ha\e been introduced 
into the body from an externa! 
source. Sometimes a natural im¬ 
munity exists, such as the immuB!t 3 -*’ 
which human beings have against 
many animal diseases and vice 
versa. Depletion of the body 
through deprivation may render the 
system susceptible to an infection 
to which ordinarily it would be 
immune. 

When an infection occurs, the 
body’s greatest defense, the anti¬ 
microbe action of the blood, espe¬ 
cially that of the white ceUs, is 
lowered and the body becomes sus¬ 
ceptible to further attack by the 
microorganisms involved. Its second 
defense consists of the formation of 
antibodies which attempt to over¬ 
come the invading organisms and 
bring about recovery. The continued 
presence of these antibodies in the 
blood after the person has recovered 
gives him immunity thereafter. 

Immunization by vaccination, in¬ 
oculation, or injection of an anti¬ 
toxin provides such antibodies, 
either directly or by causing the 
body to produce them. Immunity 
may be achieved by an attack of a 
disease so slight as to be scarcely 


441 



IMMUNiZATION 


IMMUNIZATION 


noticeable—for example, it is be¬ 
lieved, in cases of infantile paralysis. 
Relative resistance to a disease may 
develop over a long period of time 
in a whole population which is 
constantly exposed to the disease. 
These people may still contract the 
disease, but are less affected by it 
than persons who have never been 
exposed to it. For instance diseases 
of European peoples and their de¬ 
scendants, such as measles and tu¬ 
berculosis, often strike more primi¬ 
tive groups with much greater 
force. See also antibody; anti¬ 
toxin; IMMUNIZATION. 

IMMUNIZATION, immunity, free¬ 
dom from or resistance to disease, 
either temporarily or permanently. 
The body itself may produce im¬ 
munity, as in the case of most in¬ 
fectious diseases, or it may be in¬ 
duced artificially. Great progress 
has been made in artificial immuni¬ 
zation against disease, the Salk im¬ 
munization against poliomyelitis be¬ 
ing the outstanding recent example. 

The body has the power to de¬ 
velop antibodies which act directly 
against disease-producing germs, or 
antitoxins which act against the 
toxins produced by microorganisms. 
In many instances, the body can 
develop the disease-fighting anti¬ 
bodies against killed bacteria or 
viruses as readily as against live 
microorganisms, with the advantage 
that risk of disease is eliminated. For 
example, the Salk vaecine is based 
on killed virus^, and a similar 
method is used against typhoid 
fever when killed bacilli of t^hoid 

442 


are injected to render the body 
imm une to typhoid fever for a 
period of years. 

Immuni ty against diphtheria is 
established by injecting a substance to 
produce antitoxin which combats the 
poison produced by the diphtheria 
germ. For smallpox, the virus of cow- 
pox is injected which produces a 
mild case of the disease at the region 
of injection. 

Schedules for active immunizations 
to common infectious diseases have 
been standardized and are followed 
by most physicians and clinics for 
diphtheria, tetanus, smallpox, whoop¬ 
ing cough, and poliomyelitis. Whoop¬ 
ing cough, especially dangerous to 
babies, and diphtheria immunization 
are usually given at the same time, 
at four to six months of age. The 
primary smallpox vaccination may be 
given at any time, generally when the 
child is about a year old, and should 
be repeated about four or five years 
later. The Salk vaccine schedule is 
usually standardized as follows: three 
doses of 1 c.c. each, with a two- to 
six-week interval between the first 
and second injection and the third 
injection seven months to a year 
after the second. 

Immunity against plague, yellow 
fever, typhus, cholera, and Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever can be ob¬ 
tained by people traveling to regions 
where these diseases are apt to be 
present, and in epidemic areas. Im¬ 
munization against rabies, hydropho¬ 
bia, is given after a person has been 
bitten by an animal suspected of hav¬ 
ing rabies, or after the presence of 
rabies has been definitely establiriied. 



IMPETIGO 


IMPOTENCE 


Scarlet fever immunizatioii is avail¬ 
able, but is not usually given except 
to cMdren living in institutions or 
sanatoriums or in the event of an 
epidemic. 

The value of immunization has 
been proved over and over again, 
and death rates in such diseases as 
diphtheria and smallpox have been re¬ 
duced to relative insignificance 
through immunization. See also im¬ 
munity; VACCINATION,, 

IMPETIGOj an infection, most fre¬ 
quently afiEecting children, in which 
the skin is covered with pus-filled 
eruptions. Although impetigo occurs 
most often on the face, other parts 
of the body, especially the hands, 
may be involved. 

Impetigo is transmitted either di¬ 
rectly from one person to another or 
by contact with articles used in 
common. If the infection is promptly 
treated, a cure can often be achieved 
in a week or two. Otherwise the 
problem becomes more diflBcult and 
may continue for a long time. 
Another complication which arises 
if the disease is permitted to linger 
is that the infected areas become sus¬ 
ceptible to germs other than those of 
impetigo and thus prolong the treat¬ 
ment Impetigo may occur simul¬ 
taneously with infestation by lice or 
mites, with one condition tending to 
enhance the other. 

Impetigo is now successfully 
treated not only with antiseptic oint¬ 
ments such as ammoniated mercury 
but also with preparations which 
contain sulfa, penicillin, and other 
antibiotic drags such as bacitracin 
neomycin and polsmixin. 


Much can be done to preheat the 
spread of impetigo to others* Persons 
who resist the temptation to scratch 
lessen the likelihood of transmitting 
the disease by means of contaminated 
fingers. Those infected with impetigo 
must always use a separate wash¬ 
cloth and towel. Moreover, a school 
child with this disease should remain 
at home until he has recovered com¬ 
pletely. See also skin. 

IMPOTENCE, lack of power in a 
male to have or maintain an erection 
of the penis, and consequent inability 
to perform or complete the sexual act. 
Impotence must be contrasted with 
infertility or sterility in a male, which 
denotes inability to propagate off¬ 
spring. 

The cause of impotence may be a 
small or deformed penis which may 
be corrected by surgery, or it may be 
the result of some disease such as 
gonorrhea, diabetes, Brighfs disease, 
or a disorder of the spinal cord. 
Medical treatment is necessary. 

A common cause of impotence is 
emotional disturbance. This may 
occur temporarily in the early months 
of marriage due to self-doubts and 
usually disappears during the adjust¬ 
ment period natural to this stage of 
life. Impotence, unfortunately, often 
results from incompatibility which 
develops later in a marriage relation¬ 
ship. In such cases, psychotherapy 
may be the only way to resolve these 
marital conflicts. 

Age is often a factor in impotence. 
Men over fifty-five sometimes begin 
to lose their capacity for erection 
and their interest in sex. Many men. 


443 



iNCISlON 


INDIGESTION 


however^ retain their powers for 
years beyond this age. 

MCISIOM. See wounds. 

MDIGESTION^ or dyspepsia (a 
term now considered a misnomer and 
seldom used), denotes discomfort 
that accompanies or follows the in¬ 
take of food. It is usually associated 
with difficult or painful digestion and 
may be related to actual failure of 
some phase of the digestive process. 

Symptoms of indigestion are varied 
—a feeling of fullness or weight in 
the pit of the stomach; pain, either 
dull and steady or acute and spas¬ 
modic, which may follow immedi¬ 
ately or occur some time after eating; 
nausea, or vomiting, which often re¬ 
lieves the pain or discomfort. Heart¬ 
burn may appear, accompanied by 
acid, sour acrid liquid thrown into the 
mouth from the stomach. Flatulence 
and coated tongue, headache and 
dizziness may be present Belching 
is not necessarily a sign of indiges- 
tion. 

One group of gastric disturbances 
is caused by gastritis, dilation of the 
stomach, ulcers, cancer, gastroptosis, 
and others. Indigestion may result 
from disorders in organs other than 
the stomach, such as cirrhosis of the 
liver, gallbladder inflammation, ap¬ 
pendicitis, nephritis, peritonitis, heart 
or lung diseases which may affect 
the lining of the stomach, tubercu¬ 
losis, and anemia. Certain rpental 
conditiom may be the source of in- 
digtttioii, such as hysteria, neuras¬ 
thenia, or hypochond^sis. 

Because indigestion may originate 
from such a wide vmiety of causes. 


prompt treatment should be sought. 
The doctor will be guided by the 
symptoms and treatment may vary 
from bicarbonate of soda to relieve 
stomach acidity to surgery for ulcers. ^ 
Many cases of indigestion are due 



Indigesflon—The human digestive system, 
showing organs and parts of the body con¬ 
cerned with the ingestion of food and the 
elimination of waste materials. Food goes 
into the mouth, down the esophagus, info 
the stomach, smoll intestine, large intestine, 
and finally to the anal aperafure. The 
esophagus is ten to twelve inches long and 
very muscular. Digestion starts in the stom¬ 
ach where the food accumulates. The strong 
muscles of the stomach grind and mix the 
food with the stomach secretions and the 
contents are emptied into the small intestine 
where digestion is completed. The small In¬ 
testine measures approximately twenty feet 
long and occupies most of the abdominal 
cavity. The small intestine opens into the 
large intestine which Is about five feet long 
and three inches in diameter. The large 
intestine gradually narrows to form the rec¬ 
tum and anal aperafure. 


444 






iNDySTiiAL HEALTH 


MDUSTRIAL HEALTH 


to emotional disturbances rather 
than to organic diseases or disorder. 
Worry, nervousness, or frustration 
over a long period of time may cause 
constant irritation in the stomach. 
The person should endeavor to re¬ 
lieve or remove the causes of tension 
and to adopt a calmer, more relaxed 
general attitude. Plenty of sleep, re¬ 
laxation, and special attention to the 
diet are essential for persons with 
nervous indigestion. In nervous indi¬ 
gestion, treatment includes a regimen 
of diet and eating habits, which will 
help the stomach heal itself. This 
often includes the following: 

1. Eat meals at regular hours. This 
helps the stomach to secrete its juices 
at regular times. If meals are delayed, 
the concentrated acids may irritate 
the lining of the stomach, which is 
the first step to an ulcer. 

2. Avoid large heavy meals. Small 
meals at frequent intervals are better 
than large meals less frequently. 

3. Eat slowly and chew the food 
carefully. 

4. Avoid irritating stimulants and 
spicy and greasy foods. 

5. Drink a glass of milk between 
meals. This will help overcome the 
excess acid in the stomach. 

INDUSTRIAL HEALTH. Industrial 
absenteeism is the result, primarily, 
of ordinary complaints such as, the 
common cold, indigestion, tonsillitis, 
nervous disorders, menstruation, 
rheumatism, arthritis and gout. The 
common cold is actualy the largest 
single cause of absences. From 80 to 
90 per cent of loss of man hours be¬ 


cause of accident is due to psi’etio¬ 
logical factors. Absenteeism costs 
more than ten billion dollars an¬ 
nually. One out of eveiy* fifty workers 
IS a problem drinker, and aicoholism 
accounts for about 10 per cent of the 
total dollar loss from absenteeism. 

Occupational Diseases. Other af¬ 
flictions which contribute to loss of 
time at work are associated with spe¬ 
cial occupations. Silicosis, for ex¬ 
ample. is caused by breathing of 
silica dust, just as lead poisoning is 
the result of inhaling lead, and car¬ 
bon dioxide poisoning by intake of 
carbon monoxide gas. A wide variety 
of chemicals, peculiar to certain in¬ 
dustries, are also increasingly re¬ 
sponsible for a number of inflam¬ 
matory disorders of the skin as well 
as other diseases. 

Occupational maladies also in¬ 
clude undulant fever, which is con¬ 
tracted chiefly by people who work 
with cattle; anthrax, which results 
from handling of hides; caisson dis¬ 
ease, the ‘‘bends/* by those who work 
under conditions of great pressure or 
at high altitude. The newer indus¬ 
tries which involve radiant ma¬ 
terials, such as atomic plants, have 
introduced a whole new set of haz¬ 
ards which are being studied and for 
which regulations have been estab¬ 
lished in many states. 

The worker should be compelled 
to familiarize himself with the occu¬ 
pational hazards involved in Ms par- 
ticu^ job, so that he will be thor¬ 
oughly acquainted with the nature 
of the diseases incurred, and alert to 
the first symptoms of their possible 
onset. Such symptoms should be re- 


445 



INFANTILISM 


INFECTIONS 


ported to the medical office of the 
plant or to the family doctor, since 
the earlier the diagnosis can be made, 
the simpler and more certain the 
cure. 

A working people enlightened to 
good health practices is the best 
guarantee that the advances in in¬ 
dustrial and general medicine, safety 
and sanitation engineering will make 
their most effective contributions to 
the general welfare. See also the 
names of specific diseases. 

INFANTILISM, a condition in 
which growth is retarded or inhibited 
because of malfunctioning of certain 
glands or other causes. When the 
pituitary gland is affected and there 
is a lack of growth, hormones, teeth, 
bones, and the sex glands will be 
involved and the result is an under¬ 
developed body, a dwarf, seldom 
over three to four feet in height. 
Mental retardation will take place 
and childish characteristics will per¬ 
sist into adult life. Overactivity of 
the same gland will produce giantism 
with the mental and sexual retarda¬ 
tion characteristic of dwarfism. 

Infantilism may also be the result 
of certain congenital defects, thyroid 
deficiency or other diseases. In one 
type, characteristics of senility such 
as baldness and hardening of the 
arteries may develop along with 
dwarfism. Thyroid cases respond 
sometimes amazingly well to injec¬ 
tions of thyroid extract, while many 
of the other types have no known 
cure. Another form of infantilism is 
brought about by early kidney dis¬ 
ease which results in death. 


INFECTIONS. An infection is the 
condition which occurs when the 
body or a part of the body is invaded 
by disease-causing germs or organ¬ 
isms. One or more organs or parts 
sustain at least temporary damage 
and impairment. The body as a 
whole reacts protectively, in most 
cases, with general symptoms such as 
fever. An infection restricted to one 
fairly sharply defined area, such 
as a tooth or a finger, and not 
serious enough to provoke general 
symptoms, is called a local infection, 
as distinct from a general infection, 
which involves more or less the en¬ 
tire system. 

The organisms which cause infec¬ 
tion are practically all so small that 
they are invisible without a micro¬ 
scope, the few exceptions being 
largely parasites such as hookworm 
and pinworm. The smallest organ¬ 
isms, the viruses, are visible only with 
the ultramicroscope or electron mi¬ 
croscope. Organisms causing disease 
are known scientifically as patho¬ 
genic. 

Although the science of medicine 
is concerned for the most part with 
germs, which are harmful to man, 
many organisms are not injurious. 
Necessary or beneficial to human 
life particularly are the bacteria, pres¬ 
ent in the manufacture of milk prod¬ 
ucts, alcoholic beverages, and such 
pharmaceuticals as penicillin and the 
other antibiotics. 

Microorganisms are classified in a 
number of ways, according to their 
size, their shape or their mode of life. 
The smallest are viruses, which are 
so tiny that they pass through a po- 


446 



INFECTIONS 


INFECTIONS 


rous porcelain filter. Bacteria are 
many times larger than viruses, and 
cannot pass through a filter, but 
they are nevertheless, extremel> 
small. A third group of microorgan¬ 
isms are protozoa, one-celled ani¬ 
mals, such as the ameba. 

Fungi comprise still another group 
of microorganisms, and also many 
multicellular fungi which grow much 
larger. Fungi have plantlike charac¬ 
teristics, and those which are micro¬ 
organisms are in the same general 
size class as the bacteria. 

Parasites which attack the human 
body are larger, for the most part, 
and visible without the microscope 
In addition to the intestinal worms, 
they include mites, lice, and various 
other insects. 

Midway in size between the vi¬ 
ruses and the bacteria is a special 
group of microorganisms called the 
rickettsiae, after the doctor who first 
identified them. They cause typhus. 
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, and 
related diseases. 

Bacteria are classified according 
to their shapes. The three main classi¬ 
fications are (1) the bacillus, which 
is rod-shaped; (2) the coccus, which 
is oval or spherical and (3) those 
shaped in one or more curves, like 
the vibrio, resembling a comma; and 
the spiral spirochete and spirillum. 
Some live singly, others together in 
clumps or chains. 

The bacilli include the germs of 
many of the commonest and most 
severe diseases, including tubercu¬ 
losis, t5^hoid fever, plague, whoop¬ 
ing cough, and undulant fever. 
Among the cocci are the pneumococ¬ 


cus, pneumonia; streptococcus, famil¬ 
iar m “strep” respiratory infections; 
and staphylococcus, present in ab¬ 
scesses and boOs. An example of the 
spirochete is the organism causing 
syphilis. 

Some senous diseases caused by 
infecting organisms other than bac¬ 
teria are poliomyelitis, smallpox, in¬ 
fluenza, and mumps, caused by vi¬ 
ruses; amebic dysentery, malaria, and 
sleeping sickness, caused by proto¬ 
zoa; numerous skin disorders, such 
as athlete’s foot, caused by fungi, 
and other diseases which affect the 
whole system, such as coccidioido¬ 
mycosis, a mild lung infection which 
is widespread in the southwestern 
United States; and trichinosis, ele¬ 
phantiasis, and hookworm, caused by 
worms. 

An infection normally follows a 
regular course of development. In 
general, when an organ, tissue, or 
area of the body is invaded by an 
infecting organism, the body re¬ 
sponds by taking appropriate pro¬ 
tective measures. The nature of these 
responses depends upon the type of 
infection and its severity. For ex¬ 
ample, a boil is a localized bacterial 
infection of a group of skin cells. 
The body first walls off the area, so 
that the invading bacteria are pre¬ 
vented from entering the blood 
cells and other means, and the in¬ 
fection remains localized. In pneu¬ 
monia, unless the bacteria or vi¬ 
ruses which cause it are checked or 
destroyed by drugs, the whole bodily 
system is involved. Fever, weakness, 
digestive disturbances, and the other 
symptoms associated with the dis- 

447 



iNFECTiONS 


INFECTIONS 


ease are all indicative of a general 
response by the entire body. 

The body’s first defense is to pre¬ 
vent the entrance of harmful organ¬ 
isms. This is the purpose of the skin, 
mucuous membrane, and the various 
devices which protect the apertures 
of the body. When these defenses are 
breached, however, the body immedi¬ 
ately counterattacks the invading 
force. The white cells in the blood 
rapidly increase in number and at¬ 
tempt to envelop and destroy, actu¬ 
ally consume, individual bacteria. A 
local infection, in a finger, toe or 
a tooth, for example, is isolated 
as much as possible, by a tem¬ 
porary protective encirclement. Blood 
plasma bunches up bacteria for 
easier disposal, and antibodies, spe¬ 
cial substances which combat specific 
microorganisms, are formed in the 
blood. The toxins, or poisons, pro¬ 
duced fay the bacteria, prompt the 
body to develop antitoxins to coun¬ 
teract them. 

One of the chief reasons for com¬ 
plete bed rest during an acute general 
infection is to allow the body’s en¬ 
ergies entire freedom for these de¬ 
fensive activities. If these energies 
continue to be drawn upon for other 
purposes during serious illness, the 
body may be so weakened that it will 
be unable to cope with the invading 
organisms promptly and new and 
separate infections may occur. In 
bacteremia or septicemia, for in¬ 
stance, the body’s system for confin¬ 
ing an infection to a specific area 
becomes disorganized and bacteria 
escape into the blood in large num¬ 
bers. In other cases, infection may 


leave the body so depleted than an 
entirely difierent microorganism may 
attack in another area before the first 
is overcome. This creates a condition 
called a secondary infection. 

To supplement the body’s natural 
defenses against infection, medical 
science has developed many addi¬ 
tional protective measures. So effec¬ 
tive have these discoveries been that 
many diseases that were once epi¬ 
demic scourges have now been re¬ 
duced to unimportance. 

Probably the measure which has 
been most effective in combatting in¬ 
fections is sanitation, provisions such 
as those insuring pure water supplies, 
adequate sewage systems, and mod¬ 
em methods of keeping the environ¬ 
ment and the body clean and orderly. 
Since microorganisms thrive in dirt, 
their worst enemy is cle anlin ess. 
Cholera and plague, diseases once 
common throughout the world, 
seldom occur today in industrially 
advanced countries. Specific disin¬ 
fectants, such as chlorine in water, 
iodine, alcohol, and other antiseptics, 
are also part of the improvement in 
modem sanitation. 

Medical science has also discov¬ 
ered ways by which the body itself 
can be stimulated to produce sub¬ 
stances which will protect it against 
specific diseases. In vaccination, 
weakened or dead forms of micro¬ 
organisms are injected into the body 
in such a way as to cause the forma¬ 
tion of antibodies which render the 
person safe against attack by infec¬ 
tion. By inoculation, a person can be 
given antitoxins wMch protect him 
against the toxins of invading organ- 


448 



INFECTIONS 


INFECTIONS 


isms. Smallpox, rabies, typhoid, yel¬ 
low fever, and, most recently, polio¬ 
myelitis are some of the diseases 
that have yielded to these methods. 

In addition, research has in recent 
years also developed specific drugs 
which have disposed of many re¬ 
maining major infections as serious 
threats. The best-known and most 
widely used of the newer drugs are 
the antibiotics, substances derived 
from living organisms. Penicillin was 
the first, and is still the most familiar. 
Another group includes the so-called 
sulfonamides, which are coal tar de¬ 
rivatives. 

At the turn of the century, pneu¬ 
monia was a serious disease, one of 
the most significant causes of death. 
Once the disease began, little could 
be done beyond putting the patient 
to bed and helping him conserve his 
strength for the siege. Today peni¬ 
cillin and other antibiotics have 
brought pneumonia virtually under 
control. Most pneumonia patients 
can be relieved in a matter of hours, 
and death, or even extreme sufi[ering, 
has become infrequent. The death 
rate has dropped from around 60 
per 100,000 population to about 7 
per 100,000. Tremendous progress 
has also been made against the vene¬ 
real diseases by use of the antibi¬ 
otics. The treatment of tuberculosis 
has been so altered by the use of 
streptomycin, para-amino-salicylic 
acid, isoniazid, and other newer 
drugs that many major tuberculosis 
sanitoriums have been permanently 
closed. 

Some new health problems have 
arisen with or because of these new 


remedies. The so-called “side effects” 
of the drugs have sometimes been 
disturbing. The tendency of many 
disease-causing microorganisms to 
develop strains which are resistant to 
one or more of the drugs has also 
caused concern. These difiBcuities are 
insignificant, however, when consid¬ 
ered beside the undreamed-of pro¬ 
tection of human life and health 
which these drugs have made possi¬ 
ble. 

So familiar, accessible, and sure is 
the shield of medicine against in¬ 
fectious disease today that its rela¬ 
tive newness is often not realized. 
An understanding of the nature of in¬ 
fection did not exist before the work 
of Louis Pasteur, the French scien¬ 
tist who died in 1895. He first con¬ 
ceived and proved the existence of 
microorganisms by establishing that 
animal and vegetable matter do not 
decompose spontaneously. When he 
boiled such matter, it did not decom¬ 
pose, but the process would begin 
when he added unboiled matter to it. 
From this simple experiment ulti¬ 
mately sprang all of today’s knowl¬ 
edge of infection and medicine’s 
power to combat it. 

Before the experimental work of 
Lister, a British surgeon who died in 
1912, virtually all surgery was ac¬ 
companied by massive wound infec¬ 
tions and suppuration. Applying 
Pasteur’s principles. Lister showed 
that sterilization of operating equip¬ 
ment and the use of antiseptics could 
prevent infection. Today’s improved 
techniques, together with drugs such 
as the antibiotics, have made possi¬ 
ble the penetration and repair of the 


449 



INFECTIOUS DISEASES 


INFECTIOUS DISEASES 


inmost parts of the body, practically 
without danger of infection. See also 
immunization; infectious dis¬ 
eases; sanitation; vaccinatton; 
and names of specific diseases, drugs, 
and organisms. 

INFECTIOUS DISEASES, those 
diseases caused by an invasion by 
organisms, usually microorganisms, 
as opposed to diseases caused by 
disordered functioning of parts of the 
body; or by foreign substances, as in 
allergy; or by external forces, such 
as heat or electricity; or by dietary 
deficiencies. 

When a person contracts an in¬ 
fectious disease the offending organ¬ 
ism multiplies within the body with 
harmful effects, and disrupts the 
function of the body by producing 
poisonous toxins or causing other 
disorders. The invading organism 
overcomes the body’s defenses, at 
least until the body can rally its 
protective forces. Usually such an 
invasion comes from the exterior, 
the germ entering through the ah, 
food, or some other route. Fre¬ 
quently, however, if the normal re¬ 
sistance of the body is lowered, or¬ 
ganisms already living in the body 
may escape from the checks usually 
imposed on them by the body itself 
or by other organisms, and may then 
multiply in the same way as an ex¬ 
ternal invader. 

The causative organism of an in¬ 
fectious disease may be one of the 
viruses, rickettsiae, bacteria, fungi, 
protozoa, or minute worms. The 
range of infectious diseases is be- 
wilderingly large; yet by proper at¬ 


tention to preventives such as sanita¬ 
tion, inoculation, and vaccination 
and by the use of the newer drugs, 
especially penicillin and the other 
antibiotics, medicine today affords 
effective protection against most of 
them. 

Following are some of the princi¬ 
ple infections caused by each type 
of agent. 

Viruses: Smallpox, poliomyelitis, 
rabies, yellow fever, measles, mumps, 
infectious hepatitis, chickenpox, 
shingles, influenza, virus pneumonia, 
psittacosis or parrot fever. 

Bacteria: Plague, tuberculosis, 
pneumonia, scarlet fever, syphilis, 
gonorrhea, whooping cough, tula¬ 
remia, undulant fever, spinal men¬ 
ingitis, diphtheria, tetanus, erysipelas, 
rheumatic fever, cholera, leprosy, 
yaws. 

Rickettsiae: Tyqihus, Rocky 

Mountain spotted fever, scrub typhus. 

Fungi: Skin diseases of the “ath¬ 
lete’s foot” type. More serious 
systemic diseases include coccidioi¬ 
domycosis, a lung infection, and his- 
toplasmosfe, characterized by enlarge¬ 
ment of the liver and spleen, fever, 
and anemia. 

Protozoa, one-celled animal micro¬ 
organisms: Amebic dysentery; ma¬ 
laria; African sleeping sickness, 
spread by bite of the tsetse fly; black- 
water fever, a severe complication 
of malaria. 

Worms: Hookworm; tapeworm; 
trichinosis. 

Each disease and type of disease 
is spread by means intimately in¬ 
volved with the manner in which the 
organism lives. Viruses, for instance. 


450 



INFECTIOUS DISEASES, CONTROL OF 


may live within insects for a con¬ 
siderable time, and be passed down 
to later generations in insect eggs. 
These and the rickettsiae grow and 
multiply only within other living 
cells, whereas the other microorgan¬ 
isms are not so restricted. 

The transmission of viral diseases 
is less well understood than those 
diseases which result from bacterial 
infection. Many of the latter pass 
from one person to another through 
the droplets in a cough or a sneeze, 
others through insects, and rabies 
through the bite of a rabid animal. 
The rickettsial infections spread only 
through insects, such as the louse, 
tick, or rat flea, the organism re¬ 
quiring a host. Thus, one of these 
diseases may be acquired by an in¬ 
sect bite; through a scratch which has 
picked up some insect excrement or 
remains of an insect crushed in 
scratching; or even, in at least one 
case, that of Q fever, by breathing 
insect excrement. 

Bacterial infection may be spread 
in droplets from breathing or cough¬ 
ing, by direct contact, in food and 
water, in human excrement, on in¬ 
sects such as the ubiquitous fly, by 
bite of insects, and in other ways. 
Protozoa may be disseminated in 
food and water or through the bite 
of insects carrying the organism, as 
in malaria. 

Infestation by worms generally oc¬ 
curs as a result of exposure in places 
where the organisms are common. 
Going barefooted, in parts of the 
United States, for instance, invites 
hookworm. Trichinosis is usually 
contracted from infected pork which 


has not been cooked sufficiently at 
high enough temperatures. 

Until the advent of modem sanita¬ 
tion, and more especially of \accina- 
tion, inoculation, and the new phar¬ 
maceutical agents against infection, 
such diseases were a source of incal¬ 
culable suffering and loss. Aside from 
the toll in human life, the economic 
and industrial effects of diseases such 
as malaria, yeflow fever, smallpox, 
plague, and tuberculosis, before mod¬ 
em preventives and remedies obliter¬ 
ated or reduced their virulence, is 
beyond comprehension. These dis¬ 
eases were the chief deterrents in the 
quest for greater longevity, and by 
their depredations they affected the 
whole tempo of human development. 
Between 1850 and 1950, the average 
life span in the United States grew 
from approximately forty to sixty- 
five years, and the reduction of in¬ 
fectious disease was one of the pri¬ 
mary responsible factors. Today few 
major types of such disorders are be¬ 
yond the reach of medicine. 

For further details on character¬ 
istics, mode of transmission, symp¬ 
toms, and therapeutic agents see 
names of specific diseases, drugs, and 
organisms. See also immunization; 
infections; vaccination. 

INFECTIOUS DISEASES, CON¬ 
TROL OF. During the past century 
infectious diseases have largely been 
brought under control by enormous 
advances in both their prevention 
and treatment. It is the great im¬ 
provements in sanitation that have 
mainly contributed to control of in¬ 
fectious disease. Most of the civil- 


451 



INFLAMMATiOM 


INFLAMMATION 


ized world eow^ has a water supply 
almost entirely free of microorgan¬ 
isms that used to cause serious 
harm to human beings. In those 
parts of the earth mankind no 
longer experiences the epidemics of 
typhoid fever and cholera that 
formerly claimed thousands of lives 
every year. The pasteurization of 
milk has been paramount in reduc¬ 
ing the occurrence of infectious in¬ 
fantile diarrhea, a disease which was, 
until the beginning of this century, 
the leading cause of infant mortality. 

Control of insects has all but 
eliminated serious mosquito-borne 
diseases such as malaria and yellow 
fever from many parts of the world 
where they formerly brought dan¬ 
gerous illnesses to millions of people. 
Although still far from complete, 
the control of rats which harbor 
fleas that carry bubonic plague has 
greatly reduced the incidence of this 
disease. Plague used to be one of 
the greatest scourges of the human 
race, exacting a toll of life probably 
unequaled by any other infectious 
disease. 

The discovery of chemicals and 
antibiotics capable of destroying 
harmful microorganisms is one of 
the most spectacular advances in the 
history of medicine. By means of 
these agents, the most common 
forms of pneumonia have been 
brought under control, so that this 
disease, which succeeded tubercu¬ 
losis as "'‘Captain of the Men of 
Death,” no longer presents a seri¬ 
ous threat to life. The sulfa drugs 
and penicillin brought about this 


happy state of affairs in an unbeliev¬ 
ably short space of time. These 
drugs have also greatly reduced the 
seriousness of the streptococcal in¬ 
fections and have diminished the in¬ 
cidence of that crippling disease of 
childhood, rheumatic fever. Since 
the discovery of streptomycin and 
isoniazid the death rate from tuber¬ 
culosis has decreased in a startling 
manner, and these drugs bring 
about the recovery of most children 
and adults with tuberculous menin¬ 
gitis, which formerly was invariably 
fatal. The rickettsial diseases such as 
typhus have also been rendered 
much less serious by the discovery 
of the “mycin” antibiotics. 

As miraculous as the discovery 
and development of antibiotics has 
been, one problem in this field still 
remains unsolved: all the true 
viruses harmful to man are unaf¬ 
fected by the antibiotics thus far 
discovered. See also infectious 

DISEASES. 

INFLAMMATION, a reaction of 
the tissues to injury, characterized by 
redness, heat, swelling, and pain, re¬ 
gardless of the cause. (The inflamma¬ 
tion may be a symptom of a disease 
or ailment, but this discussion con¬ 
cerns itself with the actual condi¬ 
tion of the inflamed tissue.) The 
redness and heat are due to an influx 
of blood to the affected area; the 
sweUing and pain are also due to 
blood but even more to the inflow of 
watery fluid or lymph which distends 
the tissue, compresses the nerve 
endings, and causes pain. The white 
cells of the blood accumulate at the 


452 



INFLUENZA 


INFLUENZA 


affected area and attempt to kill the 
invading microorganisms. If they do 
not and too many white cells are 
destroyed, an abscess forms. Inflam¬ 
mation is usually due to microorgan¬ 
isms, but may also result from severe 
irritation of the skin, as from rub¬ 
bing, chemical action, or heat. 

When germs are involved in the 
inflammation the wotinded area 
should be cleaned and antiseptics ap¬ 
plied. Injections of serums and vac¬ 
cines, and incisions to relieve the 
accumulation of pus are often useful 
measures which aid the natural proc¬ 
ess by which the tissues heal them¬ 
selves. The inflamed part should be 
rested and if the inflammation has 
been caused by some irritant like a 
foreign object in the eye, this should 
be promptly removed. Hot applica¬ 
tions to promote circulation of the 
blood to the affected area and ease 
pain may be used. Cold applications 
are sometimes recommended but 
should be applied cautiously since 
they can nullify the inflammation 
which may be part of the natural 
process of eradicating the effect of 
an irritant in the tissue. 

INFLUENZA, commonly known as 
the flu or grippe, a highly contagious 
disease caused by a filterable virus, 
one capable of passing through a 
Berkefeld clay filter. It usually ap¬ 
pears in the winter in epidemic form 
throughout the world and spreads 
with amazing rapidity during these 
outbreaks. Generally influenza is 
self-limited; that is, it runs a definite 
course within a specific period of 
time and is of short duration. While 


rarely serious in itself, influenza tends 
to predispose to secondary infections 
of the lungs, which may become 
serious. 

Although influenza is belie\’ed to 
be a disease of antiquity—Hippoc¬ 
rates describes an epidemic now pre¬ 
sumed to have been influenza—the 
first authentic record is a descrip¬ 
tion of the European epidemic of 
pandemic outbreaks (epidemics 
1510. Since that time at least eight 
which affect huge populations over 
the entire world) have occurred. Am 
influenza epidemic occurred during 
World War I and from 1918 to 1920 
spread over more than half the 
world with devastating results. In 
1957 an epidemic broke out m the 
Orient; although many himdreds of 
thousands of persons were affected, 
most cases were mild and it was not 
serious. 

The characteristic features of in¬ 
fluenza epidemics have been the ex¬ 
plosive aspect of the outbreaks, their 
rapid spread, the great numbers in¬ 
volved and the comparatively short 
duration of each wave. The spread 
of the disease is accelerated by the 
ease and rapidity with which trans¬ 
mission of the infection takes place 
from person to person by direct con¬ 
tact and by droplet infection in talk¬ 
ing, sneezing, or coughing. 

The symptoms of influenza appear 
suddenly from one to three days 
after exposure. Chills and fever, 
headache, backache, and extreme 
malaise are present. Usually the fever 
is higher and the weakness more in¬ 
tense than in the common cold. Dis¬ 
charges develop from the throat. 


453 



INJECTION 


INJECTION 


nose, trachea, and bronchi. The in¬ 
fection lowers the resistance of the 
respiratory tract and exposes the pa¬ 
tient to invasion by other organisms 
which may set up secondary infec¬ 
tions in the sinuses, ears, or lungs. 

In the absence of complications, 
the fever lasts from one to five days 
and convalescence proceeds rapidly, 
though accompanied by a feeling of 
weakness and general depression. In 
these cases, relapse does not take 
place. This type of influenza occurs 
in almost 95 per cent of the cases 
during the first phase of an epidemic. 

When minor complications de¬ 
velop, the original symptoms are in¬ 
tensified and are accompanied by a 
more or less severe bronchitis or 
sinusitis or both and persistent cough 
which continues for weeks, bringing 
up pus and mucous material. This 
type of infection, frequently encoun¬ 
tered in epidemic and pandemic in¬ 
fluenza, involves the ears, the bron¬ 
chial tubes, and the sinuses. 

The most severe form of influenza 
is pneumonic influenza, which is 
characterized by profound weakness 
and exhaustion, high fever, rapid 
breathing, and a discoloration of the 
skin, which looks almost heliotrope 
and indicates insufficient oxygen in¬ 
take of the blood as it passes through 
the lungs. Patients frequently cough 
up blood. Pneumonic influenza of¬ 
ten results in permanent damage to 
the bronchial tubes and lungs, and 
patients require constant care until 
the period of convalescence is well 
established. During pregnancy, spe¬ 
cial precautions must be taken to 
prevent miscarriage or fatal results. 

454 


Since 1933, when it was first dem¬ 
onstrated that epidemic influenza is 
caused by a filterable virus, two types 
of viruses, designated as type A and 
type B, have been isolated. In 1942 
a method was devised for the prepa¬ 
ration of a concentrated vaccine 
which establishes immunity about 
seven days after injection and which 
is highly effective in protecting 
against the disease. 

A specific cure for influenza is not 
known. Treatment includes confine¬ 
ment to bed as soon as the disease is 
suspected until convalescence is well 
under way and danger of complica¬ 
tions has passed. Large quantities of 
liquids are recommended while the 
fever is present. Complete isolation 
avoids sources of secondary infection. 
Visitors should be excluded and who¬ 
ever comes in contact with the pa¬ 
tient must observe rules of sanitation. 
The sickroom should be kept warm, 
and daily baths are allowed if care is 
taken that the invalid does not be¬ 
come chilled. When the fever is hi^, 
warm sponges may be given to coun¬ 
teract it, or an ice cap used. When 
necessary, aspirin may be given, in 
doses of from 0.3 gm. to 1 gm., for 
the relief of general aches and pains. 
Constipation should be treated with 
simple enemas and the diet should 
be light. 

The complications are treated simi¬ 
larly to those which appear in pneu¬ 
monia, sinusitis, and other respira¬ 
tory conditions. Wflien signs of 
bacterial infection appear, prompt 
treatment with antibiotics is im¬ 
portant. 

INJECTION. Certain drugs and 



INOCULATION 


INSECT BITES 


remedies are best introduced directly 
into the tissues rather than by mouth 
because the digestive juices react 
chemically upon them and nullify 
their effectiveness. Insulin is an out¬ 
standing example of such a sub¬ 
stance, but it is hoped that in time a 
treatment wiU be found for diabetes 
which can be taken by mouth. 
Certain antitoxins as well as certain 
powerful drugs are also best intro¬ 
duced by injection. Injection is pref¬ 
erable when an instantaneous effect 
upon the blood stream is desirable. 
When a patient is unconscious, in¬ 
jection is the only method available 
for introducing most drugs. 

The method of mjection may vary 
for several reasons. Injections may 
be hypodermic, imder the skin, intro- 
dermic, into the skin, intramuscular, 
into the muscles, intravenous, or in- 
traspinal. In sudden heart failure a 
solution of adrenalin or atropine may 
be injected straight into the heart. 
See also inoculation; vaccination. 

INOCULATION, the introduction of 
a disease agent, serum, infective 
material, or microorganism into the 
tissues through the skin or mucous 
membrane. The purpose may be to 
immunize, as in smallpox vaccina¬ 
tion, or to increase resistance to cer¬ 
tain diseases by introducing con¬ 
trolled quantities of dead germs or 
their poisons into the body where 
antibodies will develop to combat 
future invasion of the same micro¬ 
organism. See also immunization; 

VACCINATION. 

INSANITY, the legal term for a 
mental disorder. See also manic- 


depressive psychosis; schizophre¬ 
nic. 

INSECT BITES. Bites and stings of 
insects produce itching, pain, and 
swelling. Bacterial infection may 
follow secondary invasion by germs. 

Several serious diseases are trans¬ 
mitted by the bites of insects. Among 
these are malaria, carried by the 
mosquito; typhus, which is trans¬ 
mitted by the louse; Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever, which is tick-borne; 
and many others. 

The bites of insects are rarely 
fatal, with the exception of that of 
the black widow spider. The bite of 
this poisonous insect causes pain and 
redness at the point of occurrence, 
weakness, dizziness, and cramps. The 
poison spreads fairly rapidly and 
should be treated in the same way 
as snakebite poisoning. 

Most common of the insect pests 
that invade the body directly are lice 
and the itch mite. Bedbugs and 
spiders attack less frequently. Chig- 
gers and biting flies also annoy hu¬ 
man beings especially in wooded 
regions and in the tropical areas. 

Bites from chiggers, known scien¬ 
tifically as trombicula irritans, cause 
intolerable itching. Thorough wash¬ 
ing with soap and water, allowing the 
lather to remain on the skin for about 
ten minutes, followed by the ap¬ 
plication of soothing itch ointment 
is the best method of treatment. Dust¬ 
ing stockings and underclothing with 
sulphur powder before entering deep 
grass areas will help to prevent the 
chiggers from biting. 

Lice are controlled by certain de- 
lousing techniques which remove 

455 



INSOMNIA 


INSOMNIA 


lice and eggs from the body clothing, 
bedding, or wherever else they may 
be. 

Ordinary insect bites are treated 
by applying baking soda and water 
paste, vinegar, dilute ammonia, or 
mentholated or phenolated calamine 
lotion which relieve itching and burn¬ 
ing. Insect repellents should be ap¬ 
plied to exposed surfaces of the skin 
before going into regions where biting 
insects that transmit disease may be 
encountered. 

Scabies, also known as the seven- 
year itch, is caused by the itch mite 
which burrows under the skin. See 
also bedbug; bee stings; black 
WIDOW spider; ddt; lice; malaria; 

ROCKY MOUNTAIN SPOTTED FEVER; 

scabies; typhus fever. 

INSOMNIA, any degree of sleep¬ 
lessness during the time when most 
people ordinarily sleep. Aside from 
being incidental to a number of ill¬ 
nesses, including fevers, heart trouble, 
and certain brain disorders, insomnia 
may be due to a variety of causes. 

Occasionally insomnia may result 
from lack of air or overheating in 
the bedroom, oversupply or under- 
supply of bedclothing, cold feet, over¬ 
loaded stomach, need of food, taking 
coffee or tea too near bedtime, over¬ 
excitement or worry. This type of in¬ 
somnia does not present too great a 
problem, the remedy being obvious. 

If insomnia is toquent or pro¬ 
tracted enou^ to threaten health, a 
doctor ^ould be consulted. He will 
first carefully investigate to learn 
whether or not ttie insomnia is as¬ 
sociated with some physical disorder 


such as high blood pressure, harden¬ 
ing of the arteries, or infection. The 
person’s emotional condition will be 
studied. Anxieties about family or 
finances, or difficulties in job or 
career may be the underlying dis¬ 
turbance. In cases in which the 
emotional cause is not apparent, 
psychotherapy may help. In any case, 
t alkin g out troubles with friends or 
the physician may be a good idea. 

When the state of health is such 
that a rest or change is indicated, 
such a change should be made. In 
all cases of insomnia the treatment is 
directed to the cause, when this is 
found. 

Unfortunately many people are be¬ 
ing treated with drugs for sleepless¬ 
ness who could do without them, and 
many more are treating themselves 
with the widely advertised products 
which induce sleep quickly. These 
are known as h 3 q)notics, and the 
strong sleep inducers are the nar¬ 
cotics. The habit of taking these 
is easy to form and dangerous. 

However, one may avoid the neces¬ 
sity of taking drugs by certain prep¬ 
arations before bedtime. A fifteen- 
to twenty-minute walk, or a light 
massage before going to bed may 
help induce the proper state of mind 
and body for sleep. A snack such as 
hot mUk or cocoa, a warm bath, or 
reading a relaxing book before retir¬ 
ing is also helpful. 

With older people, who do not 
need as much sleep as when they 
were younger and more active, sleep¬ 
lessness may cause frustration, irri¬ 
tation, or nervousness. A glass of 


456 



INSULIN 

wine or warm milk will often induce 
sleep. Chronic constipation may be 
a factor and changes in eating habits 
and fluid intake may be in order. 
Again, a study of the problem with 
the doctor may be helpful in finding 
a solution to insomnia. 

INSULIN, the hormone produced in 
the part of the pancreas known as 
the Islets of Langerhans. It is sig¬ 
nificant in regulating the sugar level 
in the blood and in the burning of 
sugar to produce heat and energy. 
Persons who suffer from diabetes 
meUitus have a deficiency of insulin. 

In 1921, two Canadian scientists, 
Frederick G. Banting and his assistant, 
Charles Best, isolated and produced 
insulin in a form that could be bene¬ 
ficially used to treat diabetes. Since 
then, msulin has been produced 
cheaply and is used widely by the 
millions of people who suffer from 
diabetes. 

Ttisnltn is not a cure for diabetes, 
but it supplements a deficiency. Care 
must be taken in using it. Patients 
who take too much msulin may 
have an insulin shock which in¬ 
volves a reduction in the blood-sugar 
requiring immediate attention to 
avoid serious consequences. Common 
symptoms of insulin shock are 
agitation, weakness, trembling, sweat¬ 
ing, pallor, listlessness, speech difiB- 
culty, nervousness, and unconscious¬ 
ness. If the victim of insulin shock 
is still conscious, sugar in some form, 
such as fruit juice or candy, is given 
to him. If he is unconscious, ad¬ 
renalin may be injected to revive 
him and then the sugar given to him. 


INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENT 

In some cases of unconsciousness 
glucose must be administered intra¬ 
venously. 

Insulin has been de\ eloped in a 
number of forms. Regular insulin is 
effective for from sis. to eight hours; 
globin, eight to sixteen hours; and 
protamine-zinc, tw enty-four hours. 
The most frequently used form is 
NPH, a specially modified form, in¬ 
termediate between unmodified and 
protamine insulin. See also 0Iabetf.s; 

INSULIN SHOCK THERAPY; ORIXASE. 

INSULIN SHOCK THERAPY. 
Insulin shock treatment or therapy 
for schizophrenia and other mental 
disorders was introduced by Dr. Man¬ 
fred Sakel, an American psychiatrist, 
and is widely used in mental hospi¬ 
tals. By injection of insulin, the pa¬ 
tient is put into a state of coma for 
a given period of time and then 
brought out of the coma by the 
administration of sugar. By this treat¬ 
ment, the patient during the coma 
period is in a condition in which 
psychotherapy can be more effectively 
used. 

INTERMITTENT CLAUDICA¬ 
TION. See LIMPING, INTERMITTENT. 

INTELLIGENCE QUOTIENT 

{I.Q.) Intelligence quotient is the rat¬ 
ing or score obtained from certain 
special tests which attempt to deter¬ 
mine the innate intelligence of a 
person. No test has been developed 
which can conclusively determine 
the measure of someone’s natural in¬ 
telligence, but many different meth¬ 
ods have been tried, with varying 
degrees of success. The Stanford re- 


457 



iNTERTRIGO 


INTESTINES 


vision of the Binet-Stanford test is 
one ot the most vradely used at 
present. In this intelligence test, the 
rate scored on the test is divided by 
the age of the person and multiplied 
by 100. Thus an 8-year-old child 
whose mental level, according to the 
Binet-Stanford scale, is that of a 10- 
year-old, has an I.Q. rating of 125. 
A rating of 100 is considered average. 
Scores below this are rated as; 
below 70, moron; below 50, imbecile; 
below 20, idiot. Out of a total of 
500,000 mentally deficient persons in 
the United States, 30,000 are classi¬ 
fied as idiots, 100,000 as imbeciles 
and the rest morons. 

INTERTRIGO, an irritation of the 
skin caused by friction between two 
moist adjacent skin surfaces. The 
most common locations for this 
condition are the folds of the groin 
the inner surface of the thighs, be¬ 
tween the buttocks, under the arms, 
under the neck and behind the ears. 
In obese women it may occur be¬ 
tween the breasts. In infants, inter¬ 
trigo is caused by the rubbing of a 
diaper and is known as diaper rash. 

To treat intertrigo, the opposing 
surfaces should be dusted thoroughly 
with talcum powder containing zinc 
oxide and then separated by a piece 
of lint. If the skin is macerated from 
the effects of perspiration, the skin 
should be thoroughly cleansed and 
dried before the powder is applied. 
Such care wiU help to avoid inflam¬ 
mation and infection of the skin sur¬ 
face. See also diaper rash. 

INTERVERTEBRAL DISC, a drcu- 

458 


lar plate or pad of fibrous cartilage 
located between the vertebrae of the 
spine. The disc allows movement of 
the vertebrae and acts as a buffer 
against shocks to the spinal column. 
Its action is that of a cushion, the 
disc flattening under pressure, with 
the ability also to shift its position to 
accommodate the motions of the 
spinal vertebrae. Sudden strains or 
movements may damage the disc. 
“Slipped disc” is a fairly common 
occurrence, and refers to the verte¬ 
brae of the lumbar and sacrum. The 
term intervertebral disc syndrome is 
applied to the low back pain which re¬ 
sults from compression or protrusion 
from falls, jumps, or strains in the 
bent-over position. A protruded disc 
may complicate a case of slipped 
vertebrae. 

The intervertebral disc is also sub¬ 
ject to degenerative changes, fracture, 
and calcification, or may be destroyed 
by tuberculosis of the spine. Rarely is 
it attacked by cancer. See also 

SLIPPED DISC. 

INTESTINES, in human beings, the 
membranous tubular apparatus that 
extends from the stomach to the 
anus. The first part, or small intes- 
tme, is smaller only in diameter, be¬ 
ing about twenty-three feet long, 
while the large intestine is about 
five feet in length. The small intes¬ 
tine occupies the greater portion of 
the abdominal cavity. 

The small intestine includes the 
duodenum, which is about eleven 
inches long; the jejunum, comprising 
about two-fifths of the intestine', and 
the ileum, which makes up the re- 



INTESTINES 


INTESTINES 


maining three-fifths. The large intes¬ 
tine is comprised of the cecum; 
ascending, descending, and transverse 
colons; the rectum and anal canal. 

The intestines are lined with tis¬ 
sues which secrete digestive fluids in 
some portions, and with other tissues 
which absorb the nutrients, water, 
and fats at other points. The jejimum 
and ileum are completely covered by 
the peritoneum. The muscular wall 
of the intestine consists of outer and 
inner layers of fibers. The inner sur¬ 
face of the small intestine is covered 
by villi, which are tiny, fingerlike 
projections containing the lacteals, 
which convey fats to the larger ves¬ 
sels of the system. 

The process of digestion, which be¬ 
gins in the mouth and continues 
through the stomach, is completed 
chiefly in the upper part of the small 
intestine, after the partly digested 
food leaves the stomach. It usually 
requires about four hours for the 
food to pass through the small intes¬ 
tine. 

The food is passed along by 
muscular contractions, in waves, 
which are known collectively as 
peristalsis. The food is also broken up 
by a series of contractions within the 
wavelike motions, by segmentation. 
Indigestible food remaining is passed 
into the large intestine through the 
cecum. Finally the water, and some 
sugar in solution, is absorbed by the 
large intestine, and the remainder 
passes out as feces through the 
rectum. When the contents of the 
bowel pass into the rectum, a mecha¬ 
nism responsive to fecal pressure is 
set up which indicates that the feces 


is ready to be expelled. The entire 
process, from consumption to ejec¬ 
tion, takes about eighteen hours. 



Infestisies—The Intestinal wolf is made yp 
of various layers of tissue. Because the in¬ 
testine is provided ’tvifli both longltudlinol 
and circular muscle fibres, it is able to 
constrict circularly and perform worm-like 
movements (peristalsisl and thus pass its 
contents on down the tube. Irritation, in- 
fiammotion end points of weakness in the 
wall may interfere with the efficiency of 
the intestine. 


459 











INTUSSUSCEPTION 


IODINE 


The large intestine is concerned 
only slightly with digestion and ab¬ 
sorption of food. 

Disorders of the intestinal tract 
are numerous, and are discussed at 
length in separate articles. Obstruc¬ 
tion of the action of the intestine may 
follow the passing of one portion of 
intestine into another, known as 
intussusception. See also abdominal 
PAIN, appendicitis; colitis; consti¬ 
pation; diarrhea; duodenum; in¬ 
digestion; intussusception; rec¬ 
tum. 

INTUSSUSCEPTION, an obstruc¬ 
tion in the intestine, brought about 
when one part of the intestine passes 
or is drawn into another part. It oc¬ 
curs most frequently at the ileocecal 
valve, located at the opening from the 
small intestine into the large intestine. 
It may be due to a tumor, to the 
presence of hardened and impacted 
indigestible material, or it may be 
caused by a rupture into which a 
portion of the bowel is pushed. 

Acute intussusception is most 
common in young children, usually 
during the first year. It is usually 
caused by straining, and is character¬ 
ized by severe pain and vomiting. 
The straining ordinarily results only 
in the evacuation of blood-stained 
mucus. Only a surgical operation 
will correct this condition. 

Chronic intussusception occurs 
usually in adults and is not too 
serious unless the obstruction be¬ 
comes acute or results in acute peri¬ 
tonitis, at which point an operation is 
also imperative. 


INVOLUTIONAL MELANCHO¬ 
LIA, a mental disturbance character¬ 
ized by mental depression. Ordinarily 
this disease occurs during middle age 
or later. The person realizes at this 
time that life’s long and ambitious 
dreams wiU probably never be wholly 
fulfilled. Moreover, as contempo¬ 
raries begin to die, and as the burden 
of family worries and responsibilities 
increase, the person becomes less 
capable of facing and overcoming his 
problems. Delusions of a serious 
nature are sometimes experienced. 
Women are more particularly the 
victims of this aflaiction, perhaps be¬ 
cause a sense of uselessness and iso¬ 
lation comes to them with special 
abruptness. 

In treating involutional melancho¬ 
lia, the physician stresses the impor¬ 
tance of a nourishing diet, adequate 
sleep, a healthful and pleasant en¬ 
vironment, proper exercise, and ab¬ 
sorbing avocations. Glandular drugs 
have also been used with success. 
Another source of help is undoubt¬ 
edly found in psychotherapy. 

IODINE, an element used in medi¬ 
cine in various forms. Tincture of 
iodine is a solution of alcohol and 
iodine, which can be applied to' the 
skin in either a weak or strong mix¬ 
ture, depending on the purpose. The 
strong tincture may cause blisters on 
the skin. Surgeons use a weak tincture 
as an antiseptic paint to disinfect the 
skin before an operation. Tincture of 
iodine is a standard item in the home 
medicine chest, and is used as a pro¬ 
tection against infection in cuts. 


460 



LQ. 


IRON 


bruises, or scratches. If tincture of 
iodine is swallowed accidentaUy, it 
may bum the mucous membranes 
and act as a poison. The person 
should be given something to cause 
vomiting, followed by a thin starch 
or arrowroot solution on bread. 

An iodine deficiency in the water 
supply can cause goiter, and the areas 
in the United States which are known 
to have this deficiency supplement 
their water supplies with iodine. See 
also GOITER. 

I.Q., the initials of Intelligence Quo¬ 
tient. See STANFORD-BINET TEST. 

IRITIS, an inflammation of the Ms, 
the circular disc of the eye, and 
sometimes also the ciliary or eyelash 
region of the eye. See also eye. 

IRON, a powder made of reduced 
iron or in the form of its salts, is a 
constituent of hemoglobin, the red 
coloring matter of the red blood cells, 
and the carrier of oxygen from the 
lungs to aU parts of the body. Iron as 
a vital part of hemoglobin not only 
assists the hemoglobin in the dis¬ 
position of waste products and car¬ 
bon dioxide from the kidneys, lungs, 
skin, and large intestine but is essen¬ 
tial in the manufacture of hemo¬ 
globin itself wi thin the body. When 
the body is deficient in hemo¬ 
globin, and therefore iron, the body 
tissues fail to receive their quota of 
oxygen. A large number of red blood 
cells are destroyed each day and 
must be replaced. 

The amount of iron needed to keep 
the body in good health is small, and 
the daily requirement of iron in 


nutrition is only about 20 milligrams 
for an adult and 10 mflligrams for a 
child, amounts which would fit on 
the head of a pin. At birth, most 
babies are oversupplied with hemo¬ 
globin, the mothers having generously 
supplied them with a store of iron- 
rich blood from their own reservoir. 

Iron in food is dissolved and ab¬ 
sorbed into the tissues th r ough the 
action of the acid in the stomach. A 
new baby’s stomach contains little 
acid and the milk that is usually its 
main food supply is low in iron. 
Therefore, all babies should be fed 
iron-rich foods from the age of two 
to three months; the type and amount 
of food should be determined by the 
physician. Iron in the diet is usually 
found in foods which are green, 
yeUow, or red in color, such as 
carrots, celery, onions, peanuts, eggs, 
molass^, and a number of fruits in¬ 
cluding bananas, apples, apricots, 
peaches, and cherries. All forms of 
iron, even metallic, can be assimi¬ 
lated. Hydrochloric acid of the stom¬ 
ach helps to separate the iron from 
the consumed food and turns it into 
ferrous iron, a form readily absorbed 
by the body. If the acid secretion of 
the stomach is greatly diminished, it 
will not dissolve the iron of the foods 
ingested, and the iron is wasted. 

Iron deficiency and its symptoms 
can be due to blood loss—such as 
injury or bleeding peptic ulcer— 
diet deficiency, and defective absorp¬ 
tion of iron in the body. The high 
incidence of anemia in women may 
generally be attributed to increased 
demands of menstruation and preg- 

461 



ISLETS OF LANGEiHANS 


ITCHING 


Eaacy. See also anemia; blood; 
hemoglobin; nutrition, 

ISLETS OF LANGERHANS- Scat¬ 
tered throughout the pancreas are 
small clumps of cells called the Is¬ 
lets of Langerhans. These islets 
have nothing to do with the func¬ 
tion of the pancreas itself. They pro¬ 
duce a hormone called “insulin.” 
This hormone controls the blood 
sugar, although some of the other 
hormones also affect its level. Main¬ 
tenance of the blood sugar level 
within a certain limited range is es¬ 
sentia! to health. If too much insulin 
is produced, the blood sugar falls to 
an abnormally low level (hypo¬ 
glycemia); and when insufficient in¬ 
sulin is produced, the blood sugar 
rises to an abnormally high level 
(hyperglycemia). 

Diabetes (diabetes mellitus) is a 
condition produced by chronic lack 
of insulin. This deficiency causes hy¬ 
perglycemia, which the body tries to 
correct by overflowing the excess 
sugar (glucose) into the urine. This 
m turn necessitates a much greater 
quantity of urine than normal. The 
loss of body water in the urine 
causes thirst. The muscles and other 
tissues cannot utilize glucose in the 
absence of insulin, so fatigue and 
weakness are prominent symptoms, 
as is hunger with an increased ap¬ 
petite. For his energy, the sufferer 
draws upon his body’s fat and pro¬ 
tein, and this causes him to lose 
weight. In severe cases, the patient 
may lose consciousness. This type of 
diabetes tends to develop rapidly, 


particularly when it occurs in 

younger people. 

A less severe variety of diabetes 
develops gradually and most often 
in older and obese individuals. A 
simple urine test for sugar is usually 
made with routine medical examina¬ 
tions, so that diabetes, if present, 
rarely is overlooked. The severe 
form is treated by daily, self-admin¬ 
istered injections of insulin. Less 
severe forms can be satisfactorily 
treated by restricted diets alone. The 
type that develops in the older obese 
person is often fully controlled by 
simple weight reduction, without 
use of insulin. 

Hypoglycemia can occur in per¬ 
sons with diabetes because of incor¬ 
rectly controlled treatment—for in¬ 
stance, injection of too much in¬ 
sulin. Once in a while it results from 
overproduction of the Islet cells, 
usually caused by a tumor. Hypogly¬ 
cemia usually results in attacks caus¬ 
ing coma with or without convul¬ 
sions. The condition can be drama¬ 
tically relieved by injecting sugar 
and prevented by eating sugary 
foods. In milder forms, it causes 
hunger, weakness, and sweating. 
When a tumor is the cause, its sur¬ 
gical removal is the only treat¬ 
ment. See also diabetes. 

ITCH. See scabies. 

ITCHING, or pruxitis as it is scien¬ 
tifically known, an irritation of the 
fine terminations of the sensory 
nerves at the skin. It may be due to a 
variety of causes. 

Itching occurs in many different 


462 



ITCHING 


ITCHING 


diseases of the skin; it may be a 
result of an eruption from sensitivity 
to certain foods, drugs, chemicals, 
material, or dusts; or it may be pro¬ 
duced by invasion of the skin by 
parasites, such as the louse or itch 
mite, or a fungus infection, such as 
ringworm. Abnormal states of the 
blood, present in diseases like dia¬ 
betes, gout, jaundice, and in various 
digestive disturbances, may produce 
itching. Nervous disorders, either of 
a mental or physiological type, may 
also cause itching. Itching often 
follows recovery from a case of der¬ 
matitis. 

Itching may be general and non¬ 
specific, or it may be located in one 
part of the body. Scratching the area 
may give temporary relief, but it also 
may lead to damage to the skin and 
intensify the discomfort. 

Control of itching depends on 
locating the cause and eliminating it. 
For example, treatment of an allergy 
or sensitivity wiU remove the cause 
and cure the itching. Itching due to a 
lack of moisture in the skin may be 
helped by repeated applications of 


bland lubricating ointments to relieve 
dryness and provide Sexibility. 

General or nonspecific itching is 
soothed by bathing in a tepid bath 
containing oatmeal extract. Sponging 
with a lotion containing sodium bi¬ 
carbonate may help. Rubbing on 
menthol dissolved in alcohol is effec¬ 
tive in itching which also bums and 
Vidtch hazel sometimes relieves gen¬ 
eral itching. Another treatment is 
application of cool compresses using 
dilute Burow’s solution, which should 
remain on the skin 15 minutes to 
three hours at a time. 

The doctor may prescribe various 
medicated ointments for specific skin 
disorders which cause itching, which 
may range from mild to antihista- 
minic lotions. When bacteria are 
present and cause a secondary itch¬ 
ing, an antibacterial ointment may be 
prescribed. 

In general, extremes of heat and 
cold should be avoided, and bathing 
kept to a Tninimum . Air-conditioning 
has also been helpful during the con¬ 
valescent period. See also eczema; 
hives; scabies. 


463 




JAPANESE WWm FEVER. See 

SCRUB TYPHUS. 

lAUNBICE, or icterus, is a symptom 
rather than a disease and is character¬ 
ized by yellowness of the skin and of 
the whites of the eyes. The color of 
the skin may range from bright 
lemon yeflow to dark olive green. 
Itching is often associated with jaun¬ 
dice, especially in cases of long dura¬ 
tion. 

Causes of Jaundice are varied. An 
excess of bile from the liver or any 
damage to the liver which affects the 
normal excretion of bile pigments 
may be responsible. Obstruction of 
the bile passages through which the 
pigment is normally excreted into the 
intestinal tract from the liver may 
rrault j&rom gallstones, tumors, or 
parasitic invasion of the ducts. In 
obstructive jaundice, the feces are 
clay-colored and the urine may vary 
in c»l0r from light yeflow to brownish 
green. The liver oilarges and its 


function gradually deteriorates unless 
an operation is performed to remove 
the cause of the obstruction. 

Infectious diseases such as malaria 
and pneumonia may damage the 
blood, causing excessive destruction 
of the blood cells and ensuing jaun¬ 
dice. Chemical poisoning, resulting 
from absorption or mhalation of toxic 
substances like arsenic or phosphorus 
which affect the liver, or other poisons 
or infections which affect the rate of 
destruction of blood cells may also 
cause jaundice. 

Catarrhal jaundice, the most com¬ 
mon type, is caused by an infection 
with a specific virus and is fairly 
common among young people. The 
acute form of jaundice is the disease 
hepatitis. 

Jaundice is one of the chief symp¬ 
toms in Wefl’s disease, wMch is 
caused by spirochetal infection. 
Chills, fever and muscle pain, are 
other symptoms of this tropical dis¬ 
ease. Treatment is chiefly by chemo- 


464 



JAW 

therapy and by transfusions of blood 
from patients convalescing from the 
disease. 

The poisons of eclampsia may 
affect the liver and cause jaundice. 
Jaundice in newborn babies is usually 
due to excessive destruction of the 
red Mood cells that may result from 
septic infection of the umbilical cord, 
or from other infections associated 
with childbirth. 

Ordinarily jaundice is a symptom 
of damage to the liver or bile ducts. 
Treatment depends on the nature of 
the causes, but in general includes 
the injection of glucose to prevent 
further damage to the liver. Any 
severe case of jaundice, whatever the 
cause, requires bed rest and careful 
diagnosis by a physician who can 
make the necessary tests and pre¬ 
scribe the proper treatment. See also 
bile; hepatitis; liver, 

JAW, a facial structure composed of 
bones, muscles, and nerves bordering 
the mouth. It consists of the upper 
and lower jaws which meet at the 
back of the head. The upper jaw 
is two separate bones, the right and 
left maxilla, which meet at the middle 
line. The lower jaw, or mandible, 
is a single bone. The alveolar is the 
part of each jaw which carries the 
teeth. Except for the alveolar, the 
maxilla is lighter in construction than 
the mandible. 

First-aid treatment of a fracture of 
the jaw is limited and the help of a 
physician is essential. If a fractured 
lower jaw can be raised to bring the 
lower teeth against the upper teeth 
without causing too much pain, the 


JOINTS aND J0!NT disorders 

jaw may tfasB ^mobilized with a 
bandage under the chin and over the 
top of the bead. The jaw should not 
be forced io ^ay. if vomiting 
occurs, the bandage should be re¬ 
moved and the injured Jaw held in 
place with the hand until the vomit¬ 
ing ceases. The bandage should then 
be replaced. 

The joint of the mandible and the 
temporal portion of the skull may 

be affected by acute inflammation of 
the tonsils or by inflammation of 
other adjoining parts of the Inside 
region of the mouth. This may cause 
difficulty in opening the mouth. This 
joint may also be affected by chronic 

osteoarthritis. 

In tetanus, spasmodic closing of 
the jaw may result. This spasmodic 
closing, known as trismus, may also 
result from irritation of the teeth 
and other causes. In acromegaly, 
the jaw is large and prominent. A 
condition known as parrot jaw may 
also affect the jaw and cause pro¬ 
trusion of the upper jaw. See also 
TETANUS. 

JEJUNAL ulcer, an ulcer located 
in the jejunum, the portion of the 
small intestine be^een the duodenum 
and ileum. The jejunum is about eight 
feet long. An ulcer developing after 
surgery performed to create an artifi¬ 
cial passage between the stomach and 
intestines is Ituown as a secondary 
jejunal ulcer. See also peptic ulcer. 

JOINTS AhlD JOB*W DISORDERS. 
The bones and cartilage of the hu¬ 
man skeleton are held together with 
many joints. The joints permit move- 


465 



JOINTS AND JOINT DISOiDERS JOINTS AND JOINT DISORDERS 


ment and action, and without them 
the skeleton would be stiff and im¬ 
movable. Some joints are fixed, as in 
the adult craniuin; some have limited 
movement, as the vertebrae of the 
spinal column; and others have free¬ 
dom of action and motion, such as 
the baii-and-socket Joints of the 
shoulder and hip. The knee is another 
free-moving Joint, but its action is 
limited to bending and straightening, 
with but slight rotation inward and 
outward. Its structure includes the 
cartilage-covered heads of the femur 
of the thigh and tibia of the lower 
leg, bound together by strong tough 
ligaments. Enclosing this is the joint 
capsule, lined with a thin membrane, 
the synovia, which secretes a lubricat¬ 
ing fluid, the synovial fluid. 

The joints such as the knee are 
moved and strengthened by muscle 
fibers and tendons distributed around 
them. 

Joint disorders, A common dis¬ 
turbance is water in a joint such as 
the knee. This results from the flow 
of serous fluid into the joint follow¬ 
ing an injury. When the condition 
appears without apparent cause and 
disappears within a few days, it is 
called intermittent hydrarthrosis, ac¬ 
cumulation of fluid in a joint. 

Following an injury blood may 
flow into the joints of some people 
who bleed easily. This condition is 
hemarthrosis, passing of blood from 
its proper place into a joint. 

Sprains, As a result of violence 
applied to a joint, the joint may be¬ 
come sprained. In sprains, parts of 
the ligaments may be tom or 


stretched, and the bones partially 
or completely displaced from con¬ 
tact, as in dislocations. In the knee, 
for example, such an injury may re¬ 
sult in displacement, bruising, or 
fracture of a semilunar cartilage, 
which will get caught between the 
bones and result in locking of the 
knee joint. Such injury frequently 
occurs to football, baseball, basket¬ 
ball, and tennis players. The condi¬ 
tion can be relieved by extending the 
leg and turning it inward. When 
locking occurs too frequently, a 
surgical operation may be indicated 
to relieve the condition. 

Another frequent joint injury is 
the pulling away of the ligament 
which extends from the kneecap to 
the large bone of the lower leg. 
The injury can occur, for example, 
when kicking a soggy football. This 
disabling of the leg and knee is 
known as Schlatter’s disease, after 
the physician who first described it. 

The treatment of severe joint in¬ 
juries usually requires the attention 
of a physician. An x-ray is ordinarily 
made to determine whether or not a 
bone is broken. If a bone has not 
been broken but the joint has been 
strained or a ligament tom, the joint 
should be protected * and supported 
by a bandage. If pain is severe, a 
local anesthetic may be injected 
directly into the injured joint. 

Some forms of sprains are treated 
by cold applications, followed by 
strapping or by applying an elastic 
bandage. Healing of a severe sprain 
can occasionally be hastened by bath¬ 
ing the affected joint in hot water or 
by applying heat in some other man- 


466 



JOINTS AND JOINT DISORDERS JOINTS AND JOINT DISORDERS 


eer. Light massage, ioilov^ed h} 
more loteiise rubbing, helps restore 
circulation and motioii. 

In cases of chronic sprain of: a 
Joints the constant condition of sv^elL 
ing, ioflammatioii, and irritation %il! 
cause the formation of adhesions and 
scar tissue. In such cases the ortho¬ 
pedic specialist will undertake special 
manipulation to break up adhesions 
and bring about looseness in the 
movement of the joint. Special kinds 
of elastic bandages have been de¬ 
veloped for treatment of sprains, 
strains, and dislocations of joints. 

Inflammation of a joint, Infiam- 
mation of a joint may be limited to 
the synovial membrane, called syno¬ 
vitis, inflammation of the lining of 
the membrane, or it may involve the 
entire structure, as in arthritis. Acute 
synovitis may develop as a result of 
any of these forms of injury, or it 
may be due to some other disorder, 
such as rheumatism or gout. The 
symptoms are almost the same as 
in sprain, and the treatment too 
is similar to that for sprain. Pain and 
swelling of the joint occur; and 
following injury, there is discolora¬ 
tion from blood effusing into the 
joint. The best treatment is an 
elastic bandage and promotion of 
circulation by moving about until 
gradually the amount of fluid di¬ 
minishes and finally disappears. 

Acute synovitis may be followed 
by stiffness and adhesions, which 
should be overcome by movements 
of the affected parts as soon as pos¬ 
sible in the course of the disorder. 
There is always a possibility of 



Joints and Joint disorders—The knee 
ioint 5s composed of the large bone of the 
thigh, called the femur, arid two smaller 
bones of the leg, knowi as the tibia and 
fibula. The patella is the scientific name 
for the kneecap 

ankylosis, or permanent fixation, to 
some degree, which can be avoided 
by careful treatment. 

Acute synovitis may become 
chronic, with not much pain but 
with weakening of the joint, thicken¬ 
ing of the membrane, and the pres¬ 
ence of fluid. The movements of the 
joint are interfered with, and there 
may be a sense of grating or rubbing 
present when the joint is moved. 
Diathermy or hot baths may help, 
but in severe cases an operation may 
be indicated. 

Dislocations, A dislocation of a 
joint is promptly followed by swell¬ 
ing to a disproportionate size and 
impairment of the ability to move 
the particular limb or pmt. (For first- 
aid measures, see dislocation.) Once 
the doctor is called, he will make 
every effort to reduce the degree 
of dislocation in order to avoid 
pseudoarthrosis, the process whereby 


467 



JUMGLE tOT 


JUNGLE ROT 


the displaced bone makes a fresh 
socket* Adhesions will form around 
the ends of the bones unless the 
dislocation is promptly handled. 

A congenital dislocation may cause 
improper development, and reduc¬ 
tion of this type of dislocation is 
difficult, with a tendency to recur¬ 
rence. 

Kneecap. The kneecap or patella 
requires the same sort of careful 
treatment when injured as do other 
bones and joints. The first step 
following injury is to have an x-ray 
picture. For complete discussion see 
KNEE. 

Elbow. The elbow joint is often 
subject to breaks resulting from falls 
and injury sustained in sports. Certain 
occupations that demand sudden lift¬ 
ing and pulling also subject the elbow 
to injuries. 

In most cases the injury to the 
elbow involves pulling of the muscles 
or ligaments, with the tearing of some 
fibers. Sometimes a portion of the 
bone is broken at the tip, with conse¬ 
quent pain and swelling. 

The small sac of fluid at the end 
of the elbow bone, called the bursa, 
may become inflamed. This condi¬ 
tion is bursitis and the pain is re¬ 
lieved by causing the excess fluid to 
escape. This may be done in any 
of several ways. The doctor may 
exert pressure on the area around the 
sac which causes it to break. The 
fluid will then flow into the surround¬ 
ing tissues. Another method is to 
draw the fluid off with needle and 
syringe. Rest and application of heat 
will often result in absorption of the 
excess fluid into the surrounding 


tissues. In severe injuries, it may be 
desirable to place the elbow in a cast 
and keep it immobilized for a long 
period. After removal from a cast 
or sling, exercise is needed to restore 
mobility to the injured elbow joint. 

Ankylosis, Ankylosis, or stiffening 
of a joint, results from enlarging of 
the synovial membrane in acute 
forms of inflammation, as may occur 
in chronic rheumatoid arthritis. The 
joint tends to assume a position of 
greatest ease to avoid pain and be¬ 
comes bent into this position more 
or less permanently. This bending 
may even increase if left alone. 
Certain optimum positions in which 
the various joints such as the elbow, 
wrist, hip, knee, and ankle may be 
placed have been found beneficial 
when there is any danger of ankylosis. 
These positions have proved to be 
the best possible ones for future use 
of the joint concerned. If suppura¬ 
tion should take place, it may be 
imperative to open and drain the 
joint. See also ankle; arthritis; 
bursitis; dislocation; elbow; liga¬ 
ments; knee; sprains. 

JUNGLE EOT, the popular term for 
tropical infectious diseases, used often 
to refer to fungus infections of the 
skin and more frequently to tropical 
ulcers. 

Tropical ulcers develop usually on 
the feet and legs of people who go 
barefoot in warm moist tropical areas. 
Following breaks in the skin, such 
as may result from a bite, abrasion, 
or perforation by the itch mite, tiny 
blisters appear. These soon develop 
into larger, foul-smelling sores which 


46S 



JUNGLE ROT 


JUNGLE iOT 


spread rapidly and ulcerate. Tlie 
ulcers become tender aod painful, 
eating their ^ay down into the tissues 
beneath the skin. Gradual disintegra¬ 
tion of the diseased tissues occurs, 
followed by sloughing. 

Healing is often spontaneous but 


sons with a tendeocy to tropical 
ulcers, in whom deficieodes of vita« 
mins. A, B, or C may be founcl. 

la cases in which the disease is 
caused by the combination of bacillus 
and spirochete, knowm as Vincent’s 
organisms, the use of penicillin and 






KASN TEST, a procedure for de¬ 
tection of syphilis. It has largely su¬ 
perseded the Wassermann test. The 
test is named for Dr. Reuben L. 
Kahn, a bacteriologist who devised it. 
See also wassermann test. 

KALA AZAM, known also as 
Dumdum fever, black fever, or Medi¬ 
terranean fever, a tropical disease 
characterized by physical wasting, 
progressive anemia, increase in the 
size of the spleen and Ever, and 
dropsy. The bone marrow, lymph 
nodes, and other vital organs are also 
affected. 

Kala azar is found chiefly in North 
Africa, along the Mediterranean Sea, 
in Asia Minor, India, and China. It 
is caused by a parasitic organism, the 
leishmania donovani, which is trans¬ 
mitted by the bite of the sandfly and 
which invades many of the vital 
organs. If the victim is untreated, the 
disease ends fatally within two years. 
Various antimony compounds are 
used to combat kda azar, but relapse 


is not uncommon. See also leish¬ 
maniasis. 

KELOIDS, overgrown scars which 
usuaEy develop after surgery but 
which may occur following any break 
in the skin, such as a pinprick, 
pimple, or insect bite. Actually a 
keloid is a benign tumor of fibrous 
tissue growing in a scar. Keloids 
occur most frequently in young 
adults, and are most common among 
Negroes. Their exact cause is un¬ 
known. 

Keloids may appear anywhere on 
the body, but are most frequently 
found on the chest and on the neck. 
A characteristic of keloids is their 
hard shiny surface, covering a mass 
of tissue growing out from the skin. 
More rare is a keloid which dis¬ 
appears spontaneously, leawg a de¬ 
pressed scar. 

Keloids are usualy painless but 
occasionally, depending on the area 
involved or their size, they become 
tender and cause pain. Sometimes a 


470 



KIDNEYS 


KIDNEYS 


bumiBg. itcMog or pricking sensation 
wil be felt* 

Surgery has been tried bot fonud 
not too effective in treatment oi 
keloids because of their tendency to 
recur. Electrolysis and electrical in- 
jection of drugs have also proved in¬ 
effective. More successful has been 
the injection of the enzyme hyal- 
uronidase into the keloid and sur¬ 
rounding tissue. The use of radium 
and x-ray has also been found help¬ 
ful in treating keloids. Special care 
must be taken, however, to avoid 
radiation of healthy tissue and to 
focus treatment on the keloid itself. 

KIIDNEYSj bean-shaped organs 
located high on the rear wall of the 
abdominal cavity. Their chief func¬ 
tion is elimination of waste substances 
from the blood through the forma¬ 
tion of urine. 

The kidneys are the channels 
through which approximately 40 to 
60 per cent of the water which is 
discarded passes out of the body. 
(The rest is eliminated largely by 
evaporation from the breath and in 
sweat.) These organs separate and 
incorporate into the urine the di¬ 
gested products of protein, substances 
in the blood which are fo,rmed con¬ 
tinuously as a result of the normal 
constructive activity of the body. The 
kidneys also help to keep the fine 
balance between acid and alkaline 
conditions in the tissues by removing 
excess acid. The preservation of 
alkalinity in the tissues and blood is 
essential to life. They also maintain 
the necessary relation between salt 
and water in the body; a disturbance 


oi this balance feuds to o^erreteiition 
oi moisture, as in drops?, or to in- 
sofficiencs of water, which may cause 
acidosis, deh}dfat!on, or reduce the 
necessary chemical changes. 

The structure and operation of the 
kidneys are unique, especially tor 
the amount of work they perform on 
a practically continuous basis in so 
small an area. Although each kidney 
is only about four inches, b}.’' tw^o, by 
one inch, according to estimates, 600 
or more quarts of blood, or 150 gal¬ 
lons, pass through them in tw^enty- 
four hours, klost of the blood con¬ 
tinues on its way unaffected, but 
about 10 per cent of it, or sixty 
quarts or more, is selectively removed 
by the kidneys as it passes. To ex¬ 
crete so large a volume of liquid as 
urine would, however, drastically de¬ 
plete the body. Therefore, most of 
the sixty quarts is reabsorbed by kid¬ 
ney cells as it passes through the kid- 



Kidiieys—A view of o kidney cut iengtliwise 
to show its structyre. An artery enters the 
kidney and a vein comes out. The ureter 
carries the urine from the kidney to the 
urinary bladder. Each kidney is a compocf 
area of collecting tubules and small filters. 
These are found in the cortex of the kidney^ 
from which the fluid passes through tiny 
tubules to reach the ureter. 


471 




KIDNEYS 


KIDNEYS 


neys. Along with it, the amino acids, 
building blocks of protein, sugar, and 
chlorides, are also reabsorbed. About 
3 per cent, or IV 2 to two quarts, is 
finally secreted as urine. Urine con¬ 
tains all the wastes—primarily the 
results of protein breakdown, urea, 
uric acid, and cheatinine—^which the 
body must remove from the blood. 

The apparatus which accomplishes 
this tremendous task is, in a sense, a 
bundle of tiny collecting tubes and 
filters. There are approximately 
1,200,000 of these tubes or tubules 
in each kidney. Since each tubule is 
about two inches long, their aggregate 
length in the ordinary person is be¬ 
tween 50 and 100 miles. Connected 
with each tubule is a minute filter, 
consisting of little chambers in which 
are packed tiny blood vessels, or 
glomeruli, which do the actual filter¬ 
ing. These blood vessels are only 
about 1/2500 of an inch in diameter, 
and total perhaps an inch in length 
within each filtration chamber. Yet 
there are so many of them that the 
total surface area available for filter¬ 
ing is about fifteen square feet. 

Various disorders may involve the 
kidneys, and some of them may be 
quite serious. Fortunately, however, 
one kidney is sufficient to perform all 
the functions of both, in the event 
that one is incapacitated or must be 
removed. 

One rather common kidney ail¬ 
ment is kidney stones. Small hard 
masses form in the organ and may 
bring a variety of consequences. Of¬ 
ten they pass into the bladder, caus¬ 
ing acute pain and kidney stone colic, 
with nausea, vomiting, and some¬ 


times collapse. These stones may 
cause an obstruction of normal flow 
of fluid within the kidney, with vari¬ 
ous adverse effects including local 
infection. Frequently the stones, or 
occasionally the entire kidney, must 
be removed surgically. Internal ob¬ 
struction in the kidney may also 
cause hydronephrosis, a condition in 
which urine collects and cannot es¬ 
cape. Here, too, surgical treatment 
may be required. 

Other disorders of the kidney in¬ 
clude nephritis, inflammation of the 
tissues; pyelitis, infection of the pel¬ 
vis of the kidney; pyelonephritis, 
which affects both pelvis and the 
rest of the tissues. Such infections 
may result when organisms infecting 
some other part of the body travel 
to the kidney in the blood stream. 
High fever, tenderness in the loin, 
and a high white blood cell count are 
characteristic. Most organisms caus¬ 
ing kidney infections are controlled 
by the antibiotics, such as penicillin 
or aureomycin, but frequently sul¬ 
fonamide drugs, mandelic acid, or 
furacin derivatives are more effective. 
Tuberculosis of the kidney may 
arise, although the disease may not 
be present in any other part of the 
body. New drugs provide efficient 
means of treating this disease. If the 
condition is far advanced and affects 
only one kidney, surgical removal 
often results in elimination of the 
condition. 

Bright’s disease is a term com¬ 
monly used to designate chronic 
inflammation of the kidney. The pres¬ 
ence of albumin in the urine, al¬ 
buminuria, which accompanies such 


472 



KIDNEYS 


KIDNEYS 


inflammation, was first pointed out 
by a British physician, Richard 
Bright, in the first half of the nine¬ 
teenth century. Actually albuminuria 
is a symptom of any of a whole group 
of disorders, just as fever is a symp¬ 
tom of infection by any of innumera¬ 
ble organisms. 

Thus Bright’s disease may desig¬ 
nate a bacterial invasion of the kid¬ 
neys, poisoning by toxins from in¬ 
vasive organisms or from those which 
originate in other infected tissues, 
poisoning by artificial poisons, dis¬ 
turbance of the kidneys caused by ob¬ 
struction of the normal passage of 
urine, tumors or other abnormal 
growths, and the effects of inter¬ 
ference with the kidneys’ blood sup¬ 
ply because of a disorder in the blood 
vessels themselves. 

Kidney disturbances may produce 
symptoms ranging from those which 
are scarcely noticeable to those which 
are severe. Often the first indication 
is the discovery of albuminuria at the 
time of a life insurance examination, 
prompting an examination by the 
doctor beyond the range of the usual 
routine tests. A slight elevation of 
blood pressure, listlessness, undue 
fatigue, headaches, and failing appe¬ 
tite may also be noticed. As the 
disease progresses, however, regard¬ 
less of the specific cause, symptoms 
develop such as spots in front of the 
eyes, dryness of the mouth and con¬ 
stant drinking of water, loss of 
weight or, conversely, gain in weight 
due to excessive holding of liquid 
within the tissues, and sometimes 
fever. Diranness, nausea, vomiting, 
and other more acute symptoms will 


be noticed as the disease progresses. 

Since these symptoms of kidney 
disorder may rise from such a variety 
of causes, unusual importance is at¬ 
tached to the exact origin in each 
case. Modem medicine has a num¬ 
ber of specialized techniques for 
studying these conditions and, if nec¬ 
essary, of examining the kidney or 
its parts directly. 

Treatment of kidney ailments is 
directed not only to removing the 
cause of the trouble but also, and 
of special significance, to resting the 
kidneys themselves. Bed rest will re¬ 
lieve the kidneys of much of the 
work they ordinarily must perform. 
Fewer waste products will form, and 
thus there will be less to be rejected. 
Additional strain may be taken from 
the kidneys by encouraging the elimi¬ 
nation of wastes through the bowels 
and perspiration. Diet control also 
can exclude substances which require 
work on the part of the kidney. 

Uremia occurs when both kidneys 
are removed or their functions totally 
blocked. The retention of the poisons 
in the body brings death in a short 
time. The chief characteristic of ure¬ 
mia is drowsiness, sometimes inter¬ 
rupted by convulsions. Occasionally 
it appears without any warning. The 
name of the disorder, given by 
Bright, was based on the assumption 
that urea, removed and passed off in 
the urine by the kidneys, is a toxic 
substance. Recent animal experi¬ 
ments, however, indicate that this 
may not be so, and therefore the 
exact cause of the poisoning that 
makes uremia fatal is not known. 

Structural abnormalities may be 


473 



KIDNEYS, DIALYSIS OF 


KIDNEYS, DIALYSIS OF 


present in the kidneys at birth. For 
example, they may be joined at one 
end and form a “horseshoe kidney,” 
which does not have any notable con¬ 
sequences. Or the two kidneys may 
be fused to form one large one. Oc¬ 
casionally, especially in women, the 
kidneys change position, which is 
usually without significance except 
when twisting occurs which blocks 
the fiow of urine. Pain and vomiting 
may result, but are relieved when the 
kidney again moves into another 
position. Recurrence may be pre¬ 
vented by wearing a suitable padded 
support, or by surgery. 

Cysts and tumors also occur in the 
kidneys, blood in the urine being the 
most common symptom. Such symp¬ 
toms should be promptly reported to 
a physician. See also albuminuria; 
hematuria; nephritis; nephrosis; 
urine; urination; wilm’s tumor. 

KIDNEYS, DIALYSIS OF. Arti¬ 
ficial dialysis is used for the perma¬ 
nent maintenance of patients whose 
kidney function has been totally or 
almost totally destroyed by disease 
or injury. It is an alternative to kid¬ 
ney transplant, and is also used on a 
temporary basis while arrangements 
for a kidney transplant are being 
made. 

By the middle I960’s, there were 
nearly 60 kidney dialysis centers in 
the United States and some 500 indi¬ 
vidual “kidney machines” used in the 
treatment in hospitals throughout the 
country. It is estimated that both of 
these figures will be multiplied many 
times by 1975. 


The human kidney contains more 
than a million hair-fine tubes through 
which all the blood m the body 
passes. As the blood flows through 
the tubes, waste materials pass 
through the microscopically thin 
walls to be eliminated from the body 
in the urine, while the cleansed and 
purified blood returns into circula¬ 
tion. 

The “artificial kidney” (also called 
“kidney machine”) duplicates this 
process almost exactly. The intake 
tube of the machine is connected to 
an artery, and the natural pumping 
action of the heart drives the blood 
into the machine where it is passed 
between sheets of cellophane or simi¬ 
lar material immersed in a specially- 
prepared cleansing solution. The 
filtering operation of the machine is 
dependent upon a physical process 
called dialysis in which some com¬ 
ponents of a mixed fluid pass through 
a semi-permeable membrane fairly 
rapidly while other components pass 
much more slowly or not at all. In 
the case of the kidney machine, the 
urinary wastes pass through the mem¬ 
brane and are carried away by the 
cleansing solution, which is continu¬ 
ously circulated. The blood plasma 
does not pass the membrane, or only 
to a very slight degree. After emerg¬ 
ing from the filter, the cleansed blood 
is warmed to body temperature by a 
heating device, then the blood is re¬ 
turned to the patient’s body through 
a vein. The arterial and venous con¬ 
nections are ordinarily made through 
plastic tubes permanently embedded 
in the patient’s forearm. When not 


474 



KIDNEYS, DIALYSIS OF 


IE ESC, they are joiaed together in a 
U“Shaped shunt to maintain circu¬ 
lation. 

A single treatment usually takes 
ten to twelve hours, although some 
macMnes are designed to perform a 
dialysis in as little as four hours. The 
treatment must be repeated twice a 
week as long as the patient lives (un¬ 
less he has a successful kidney trans¬ 
plant). Once the patient has become 
accustomed to the machine, there is 
little or no discomfort, and he usually 
spends the time during dialysis in 
reading, watching television, or any 
other normally sedentary activity. 

Greatest disadvantages of dialysis 
are its extremely high cost and the 
fact that it ordinarily requires bulky 
and complicated apparatus which 
must be operated by skilled techni¬ 
cians. 



Kidneys, Diolysis ©I — Home-operated 
artificial kidney is used to cleanse blood of 
wastes normally removed by kidney. Pafienfs 
family must be trained to monitor machine. 


BLOOD REWARMER 



Kidneys, Wcilysis of — In diagram of kidney machine, blood 1$ pumped from artery into 
kidney chamber where semi-permeobfe membranes and action of cleansing solution 
filter out impurities. Cleansed blood is then warmed to body temperature and pumped 
back into body through vein. 


475 




KNEi 


KNEE 


An e\perimeDtai program of home 
treatment was begun on a small scale 
in 1964. Kidne} machines were in¬ 
stalled m selected patients’ homes and 
members of their iamilies trained for 
routine operation. By 1966, tech¬ 
niques had advanced to the point that 
a member of the patient's family 
could operate the machine with a 
mmimom. of medical supervision. 
One such device, developed in Balti¬ 
more, is the size of a portable radio 
and costs only $85. Although it de¬ 
mands exacting care maintenance, 
the device-called a ‘"Dialung”—is be¬ 
lieved to hold considerable promise 
for the future. 

Efforts have been undertaken to 
develop multiple treatment machines 
capable of handling a comparatively 
large number of patients simultane¬ 
ously and using a central reservoir of 
cleansing fluid which would need re¬ 
newal only once daily. Efforts are also 
being made to improve efficiency by 
synthesizing a filter material that 
could be formed into hairlike hollow 
filaments similar to those found in 
the natural kidney. 

Largely because of the limited fa¬ 
cilities available and because of the 
high cost, artificial kidney dialysis 
has been mainly confined to patients 
with simple renal failure, i.e., without 
complicating ailments and in good 
health aside from kidney disease. 
Such patients, who otherwise face 
certain death, can be returned to 
nearly normal productive lives for an 
indefinite period. 

KNEE^ a complicated joint with 


many component parts. Most signifi¬ 
cant are the capsule, the ligaments 
which bind the bones together and 
prevent untoward movements; the 
crescent-shaped pads of cartilage 
which lie on top of the shinbone 
and protect it from direct pressure of 
the thighbone; the kneecap with its 
powerful tendon; and the cushioning 
sacs or bursae that surround the main 
joint. The knee can tolerate much 
hard use, and dislocation without 
great violence is rare. 

Inflammation of the joint can 
cause pain, swelling, and limited 
movement. The ligaments may be¬ 
come weakened and to some degree 
affect the stability of the knee in 
walking or even standing. In such 
cases, a support of some kind may 
be required for the knee. When in¬ 
flammation of the knee is severe 
enough to require the person to re¬ 
main in bed, proper splints are es¬ 
sential to prevent ultimate displace¬ 
ment of the tibia head. 

Water on the knee. The knee, 
more than other joints, is liable to 
effusions of fluid by the synovial 
membrane of the capsule. This may 
follow any strain, twist, fail, or blow 
severe enough to damage a signifi¬ 
cant part of the joint. It may also be 
caused by infection or accompany 
rheumatoid arthritis. The whole joint 
wiU swell, obscuring the outline of 
the kneecap which is raised by the 
swelling and ‘‘floats.” An effusion will 
generally subside of itself, but rest is 
essential. 

Housemaid's knee. Housemaid’s 
knee results from bursitis or from 
accumulation of fluid in the patellar 


476 



KNEE 


KNEE 


bersa* TMs bursa is a sac in the 
kneecap which lies between the ten¬ 
dons the anterior surface of the knee¬ 
cap, and the skin. The condition oc¬ 
curs when a person kneels frequently. 
The fluid collects in front of the 
kneecap; whereas in water on the 
knee, the kneecap floats in the fluid 
which is behind it. 

If the condition remains untreated, 
the fluid accumulates until a sizable 
swelling forms over the kneecap, and 
bending the knee or kneeling be¬ 
comes painful. If infection reaches 
the fluid through a scratch or break 
in the skin, an abscess may form in¬ 
side the bursa, and the knee becomes 
more painful and extremely tender. 
The fluid, once it forms, can be 
drawn out of the bursa with a sy¬ 
ringe and hollow needle, under local 
anesthetic. If an abscess develops, it 
must be opened and drained. Often 
it is desirable to remove the entire 
bursa to avoid chronic recurrence 
of the condition. 

To prevent housemaid’s knee, al¬ 
ways kneel on a soft pad. 

Knock-knee, In knock-knee, the 
knee is bent inward, the foot carried 
outward, and the toes turned out 
abnormally. Both legs are usually af¬ 
fected. In early childhood, knock- 
knee usually results from rickets, but 
may also affect a child with weak 
ligaments. In the earlier stages, only 
the soft parts of the joint are in¬ 
volved and the condition may be 
corrected by manipiflation and a cor¬ 
rect alignment, preserved by splints 
or braces. When the knock-knee con¬ 
dition is of long standing, certain 
stages take place in the body struc¬ 


ture i;^hich can be corrected only bt 
an operation, which includes break¬ 
ing through the lower part of the 

femur. 

Broken kneecap. If the kneecap is 
broken, it is usually difficult to 
straighten the leg. X-rays which re¬ 
veal the nature and extent of the in¬ 
jury are necessary before the doctor 
can prescribe treatment. If the knee¬ 
cap is broken without wide separa¬ 
tion of the parts, the condition is 
frequently helped by immobilizing 
the leg with a cast or splint, thus per¬ 
mitting the parts to grow together. 
The surgeon usually uses a needle or 
syringe to withdraw the excess blood 
or fluid which may collect in the 
kneecap. The person in a cast must 
usually remain in bed for from four 
to eight weeks. When the cast is re¬ 
moved, manipulation of the joint will 
help in bending it. Application of hot 
wet packs or dry heat several times a 
day is beneficial. 

In case of wide separation of the 
parts, surgical operation under anes¬ 
thetic may be indicated. The surgeon 
will draw the parts together and 
bind them with fine steel wire or a 
similar material. And soft tissues that 
have been tom are sewed together. 
After the operation, a plaster cast is 
usually put on for four or five weeks. 
Upon removal, the knee is exercised 
and the patient permitted to bear 
weight with the knee straight. It may 
be two or three months before weight 
can be put on the knee in a bent 
position, and sometimes as long as 
six months before the knee returns to 
normal. See also joints anb joint 

DISORBERS. 


477 




LABOR. See pregnancy and pre¬ 
natal CARE. 

LACERATION, a wound made by a 
tear through the tissues. The damage 
is usually greater than when the 
wound is clean cut, and danger of 
infection is also increased. 

Lacerations may be caused by a 
Mow from a blunt instrument, from 
machinery, or from a fal against 
angular surfaces. Dirt or debris may 
be ground into the wounded tissues. 
An extensive or extremely dirty 
wound should be covered by sterile 
gauze as a first-aid measure, and then 
be cleansed and dressed by a doctor. 

small laceration can be cleaned 
with soap and water, treated with 
mild antiseptic, and bandaged. 

laryngitis, inflammation of the 

mucous membrane of the larynx. In 
acute laryngitis, the usual symptoms 
axe hoarseness and dryness of the 
"teoat, difficult and painful swallow- 
mg, coughing, discomfort and pain 


in speaking, and even partial or com¬ 
plete loss of voice. Acute laryngitis 
may occur in certain eruptions of the 
skin and mucous membranes, from 
swelling in certain gastrointestinal 
disorders, or as a secondary compli¬ 
cation of such infectious diseases as 
scarlet fever, measles, and chicken- 
pox. It often is associated with the 
common cold. 

Laryngitis is particularly dangerous 
in babies and young children. They 
may quickly become’breathless, espe¬ 
cially during inhaling when the 
breastbone may press inward and 
cause further complications. A doc¬ 
tor should be consulted at the first 
indication of laryngitis in a baby or 
child. Adults should rest in bed and 
refrain from using their voice. Cbld 
moist compresses and ice packs, in 
other cases warmth, may be bene¬ 
ficial. Inhaling steam, to which aro¬ 
matic oils may be added, is also help¬ 
ful. In serious cases, particularly 
when infection is present, the doctor 


478 



LARYNX 


LARYNX 


may prescnbe drugs and soothing 
sprays to aid in alleviating soreness 
in the larynx. 

Chronic laryngitis is charactenzed 
cMeiy by a change in the voice, 
hoarseness, and often a persistent 
cough and need to ‘‘clear the throat.” 
It may follow a single attack or series 
of recurring attacks of laryngitis, a 
misuse or overuse of the voice, and 
is also associated with chronic irrita¬ 
tion of the nose and throat. Excessive 
drinking and smoking predispose to 
chronic laryngitis. 

Any persistent hoarseness may also 
be symptomatic of early cancer of 
the larynx, of laryngeal tuberculosis, 
and of paralysis of the vocal cords, 
and medical attention should be 
sought as soon as possible. Treat¬ 
ment of chronic laryngitis always in¬ 
cludes rest of the voice, sprays and 
other remedies directed toward re¬ 
lieving the condition. See also 

LARYNX. 


LARYNX, or voice box, a cavity at 
the upper end of the windpipe which 
contains the vocal cords and serves 
as the organ for the voice. It con¬ 
sists of a number of cartilages held 
together by muscles and ligaments. 
At the upper end of the larynx is 



(oj:^en) 


(closed) 


Lciryitx—The larynx Is the organ of the 
voice. The vocal cords in the larynx, by 
stretching and shortening, open and close 
and give rise to sounds of vorious pitches* 


the epiglottis, an elastic cartilage 
which keeps food from entering the 
larynx and windpipe, directing it in¬ 
stead to the esophagus and stomach 

In the speech process, the vocul 
cords come together, leaving only a 
narrow passage. When air stakes the 
cords, they vibrate and with the sup¬ 
plementary aid of the tongue, teeth 
palate, and lips, speech is produced 
The pitch varies with the space be¬ 
tween the cords and the degree of 
tension. The differences in the na¬ 
ture and combination of these organs 
determine the type of voice. 

In the adult male, the voice has 
greater depth than that of the female, 
because of the greater size of the 
larynx and the consequent greater 
length of the vocal cords. A low- 
pitched voice is produced by slowly 
vibrating cords and a high-pitched 
voice by cords vibrating with higher 
frequency. 

To examine the larynx the doctor 
uses a small mirror, mounted at an 
angle on a metal stem, which is put 
far back into the throat. By listening 
to the sounds made when the pa¬ 
tient says, “Ah,” and by observation, 
the doctor can see any modification 
or inflammation of the larynx. 

The larynx is subject to nervous 
and physical disorders. Laryngitis is 
acute or chronic inflammation of the 
mucous membrane of the larynx. Pa¬ 
ralysis of the laryngeal muscles may 
be due to nervous causes, to a tumor 
in the chest, or result from syphUis. 
Laryngeal crisis of locomotor ataxia 
is an example of a nervous condition. 
Laryngeal tuberculosis is generally 
secondary to pulmonary tuberculosis. 


479 



LATERAL SCLEROSIS 


LEAD POISONING 


Tumors are fairly common and are 
generally benign; they can be re¬ 
moved by surgery. Cancer of the 
larynx may originate in the larynx or 
develop from adjoining areas of the 
body, and surgery to remove all or 
part of the larynx is generally indi¬ 
cated. 

Foreign objects drawn into the 
larynx may cause spasm and pro¬ 
duce an urgent danger of suffocation. 
First-aid measures, such as slapping 
the victim on the back, may help re¬ 
move the object; and if breathing has 
stopped, artificial respiration is neces¬ 
sary. K the object does not cause un¬ 
usual pain and removal does not 
seem immediately urgent, a doctor 
should remove it, since unskilled ef¬ 
forts can cause damage. See also 

LARYNGITIS. 

LATERAL SCLEROSIS, a rare dis¬ 
ease of the brain and spinal cord, oc¬ 
curring primarily in men between 
the ages of forty and fifty years. De¬ 
generation and scarring (sclerosis) 
come about gradually, leading to loss 
of control of muscle groups in the 
hands, arms, legs, and throat. As a 
result, the person may note tremors 
in the arms and legs, difficulty in 
swallowing and speaking, and shrink¬ 
age of the muscle of the extremities. 
Many factors have been attributed as 
a cause, such as fatigue, alcohol, lead 
poisoning, and syphilis, but actually 
the real cause is not known. Injury 
seems to play no part in lateral 
sclerosis. Treatment may include 
high-vitamin diet, muscle stimulants 
such as prostigmine, and rest. 

LAXATIVE. See CATHARTICS. 

480 


LEAD POISONING, as the name 
implies, a form of poisoning due to 
the introduction of lead into the 
system. 

Acute lead poisoning, which is 
comparatively rare, may occur when 
food or medicinal products are taken 
internally. The symptoms are severe, 
including sickness, colic, cramps, di¬ 
arrhea, and usually constipation, leg 
cramps, and a feeling of drowsiness. 
The best treatment is an emetic, fol¬ 
lowed by plenty of milk and half an 
ounce of Epsom salts in half a glass 
of water. The victim should be kept 
warm. 

Chronic lead poisoning occurs in 
workers in a number of industries, 
such as painting, lead mining, and 
re fining and other industries which 
utilize lead compounds. The poison 
may be inhaled as dust, or food may 
have been contaminated by the hands 
of workers to which poisonous com¬ 
pounds of lead adhere. The signs of 
chronic lead poisoning are colic, con¬ 
stipation, lead palsy which affects 
particularly the forearm and fingers, 
the symptoms of arteriosclerosis and 
chronic nephritis, and sometimes 
mental depression, convulsions, and 
a blue line at the edge of the gums. 
Chronic lead poisoning is sometimes 
treated by the administration of mag¬ 
nesium or lead sidphate solution 
which acts as a laxative and antidote 
on the lead in the digestive system, 
followed by potassium iodide which 
cleanses the tract. 

Persons who work in industries 
where lead poisoning is an occupa¬ 
tional hazard must be careful to fol¬ 
low the safety regulations which have 



LEFT-HANDEDNESS 


LEISHMANIASIS 


been established and to practice thor¬ 
ough personal hygiene. 

Water which contains lead may 
cause slow poisoning. Symptoms may 
be a gradual depreciation of health, 
failing appetite, and signs of anemia, 
constipation, and colic. Formerly, 
when lead was the base of paints, 
“painter’s colic” was an occupational 
hazard among painters, but this con¬ 
dition has been eliminated by the use 
in newer paints of a base other than 
lead. 

LEFT-HANDEDNESS. When the 
left hand is stronger or more expert 
or used in preference to the right 
hand, the person is said to be left- 
handed. Left-handedness has been 
the subject of many superstitious be¬ 
liefs and popular misconceptions, all 
of them without factual basis. Left- 
handedness may or may not be in¬ 
herited. It presents little advantage, 
except to baseball pitchers, or special 
handicap, except to golfers. At¬ 
tempts to direct a normally left- 
handed child to use his right hand 
win only confuse him and has been 
associated with the development of 
stuttering and awkwardness. True 
left-handed people are likely to favor 
using the left eye, left ear, and left 
foot, just as right-handed people 
prefer the right eye, ear, and foot. 
Beyond this type of preference, differ¬ 
ences between right-handed and left- 
handed persons are not apparent. 
See also stuttering and stammer¬ 
ing. 

LEG, the part of the lower limb be¬ 
tween the knee and the ankle; the 
upper part of the limb is the thigh. 


The bones of the leg include the 
tibia or shinbone on the inside, and 
the fibula on the outside. The two 
great bones are connected by a mem¬ 
brane. The leg contains significant 
muscles, nerves, and blood vessels, 
including the calf muscle, branches 
of the sciatic nerve, and the popliteal 
vein. 

Varicose veins, which are quite 
common, may lead to secondary dis¬ 
orders such as eczema, ulceration, 
and discoloration. Frequent exposure 
to intense heat may also lead to a 
brownish discoloration of the legs. 
Eczema on the shins, apart from that 
caused by varicose veins, is not un¬ 
usual. Dropsy or edema also affects 
the legs early in their development. In 
infantile paralysis the muscles waste 
away, and in another form of 
muscular paralysis known as pseudo- 
hypertrophic muscular paralysis the 
muscles develop unduly. See also 
ACHILLES’ tendon; ANKLE; ARTIFICIAL 
limbs; feet; knee; varicose veins. 

LEISHMANIASES, a variety of vis¬ 
ceral and superficial infections, 
caused by certain parasitic protozoa 
known as the leishmania ^er the 
famous surgeon Dr. William B. Leish- 
man. 

This group of tropical diseases in¬ 
clude visceral leishmaniasis or kala 
azar; oriental sore, an ulcerative form 
that attacks the skin; and a third 
form which attacks the mucous mem¬ 
brane of the nose, mouth, and 
pharynx. In this form the cartilage 
imderlying these structures may also 
be invaded. If the larynx is affected 
the voice may be permanently lost- 


481 



LENS 


LEUKEMIA 


The most effective treatment of 
leishmaniasis is with drugs contain¬ 
ing antimony. See also kala azar. 

LENS, glass ground so that one or 
both sides are curved, giving it the 
power to converge or scatter rays of 
light. Five types of lenses are (1) 
spherical, in which the curved side is 
part of a sphere; (2) cylindrical, in 
which the curved part is in one direc¬ 
tion only; (3) convex, bulging out¬ 
ward from its center; (4) concave, 
with an inward curve toward its 
center; (5) biconcave or biconvex, 
m which both sides are curved. The 
crystalline lens of the human eye is 
biconvex; that is, it bulges out to 
the front and back from the center. 
See abo bifocal; eye; eyeglasses. 

LEPROSY, also called Hansen’s dis¬ 
ease or Hansenosis, a chronic infec¬ 
tious ailment occurring almost exclu¬ 
sively in tropical and subtropical 
comtries. Though generally con¬ 
sidered, since Biblical times, to be a 
highly contagious disease, leprosy is 
actually only moderately infectious. 
The symptoms include ulcers, tuber¬ 
culous nodules, loss of fingers and 
toes, abnormal coloring, either exces¬ 
sive or deficient, and the emergence 
of nerveless areas in which tissue 
eventually develops gangrene. 

The best-known leper colony in 
the United States is at Carville, Loui¬ 
siana. Sulphone drugs have been used 
to treat leprosy with some success. 
Streptomycin and Aureomycin are 
also being used in an effort to find a 
specific against the bacillus which is 
believed to cause leprosy. In addition 
to medical treatment, adequate diet. 


rest, exercise, and mental hygiene are 
essential in the control of this dis¬ 
ease. 

LEUCORRHEA, any whitish dis¬ 
charge from the vagina and uterine 
tract. Popularly such discharge is 
called “the whites.” Leucorrhea may 
be indicative of an abnormality. The 
mucous glands of the vagina and 
cervix normally secrete small 
amounts of whitish material which 
moistens the tissues. Minor inflam¬ 
mation and congestion may similarly 
cause discharge, and premenstrual 
conditions sometimes stimulate ac¬ 
tivity of the mucous glands. How¬ 
ever, inflammation of the Fallopian 
tubes, which can be due to gonor¬ 
rhea, tuberculosis, or some other in¬ 
fection, can produce an abnormal 
discharge. Cancer of the uterus may 
also be the cause. Therefore, any ab¬ 
normality in quantity, color, or odor 
of the discharge from the vaginal 
tract should be referred to a physi¬ 
cian. 

LEUKEMIA, a disease of the blood 
in which the production of white 
blood cells or leukoc 5 ffes increases 
tremendously without apparent rea¬ 
son, In the normal person there are 
about 7,500 white blood cells in ev¬ 
ery cubic millimeter of blood. In 
leukemia the number may increase to 
from 100,000 to one million white 
blood cells in every cubic millim eter 
of blood. 

Although there is as yet no specific 
cure for leukemia, much progress has 
been made. Techniques of treatment 
are now available which help extend 
the life span considerably and in- 


482 



LEUKOCYTES 


LEUKOCYTES 


crease the comfort of the person with 
leukemia. 

Leukemia is generally classified as 
acute or chronic although several 
different types of leukemia are recog¬ 
nized. The acute form occurs most 
frequently in young children, the 
onset being sudden and the progress 
rapid. Chronic leukemia generally at¬ 
tacks persons over thirty-five years of 
age. Frequently the first sign of acute 
leukemia is prolonged bleeding after 
a minor operation or tooth extrac¬ 
tion. Other early signs are anemia, 
fever, pain in the bones and joints, 
and, in some cases, a swollen mouth 
and thickened gums. Chronic leu¬ 
kemia is also characterized by anemia 
and bleeding. In addition, the lymph 
nodes and spleen are noticeably en¬ 
larged. Small lumps, composed of 
the infiltrating white blood cells, may 
appear under the skin. Chronic leu¬ 
kemia may also be accompanied by 
loss of weight, nervousness, short¬ 
ness of breath, and abnormal night 
sweats. 

Treatment of leukemia depends on 
careful diagnosis to determine the 
exact type and extent of the disease. 
This can be done by examining and 
counting the white blood cells under 
a microscope. The most widely used 
treatment involves injection of radio¬ 
active phosphorus. X-ray treatment 
is also widely used and now supple¬ 
ments the treatment by injection. 
X-rays affect the bone marrow and 
help prevent secondary anemia. 
Radioactive phosphorus acts on the 
spleen and lymph nodes to reduce 
them, and acts on the bone marrow to 
inhibit the production and multiplica¬ 


tion of white blood cells fn certain 
types of acute leukemia, cortisone 
and ACTH have been effective in 
helping to produce normal white 
blood cells. Several new' chemical 
substances are undergoing expen- 
ment for the treatment of leukemia. 
Blood transfusions may be required 
during the procedure to control ane¬ 
mia, to keep the red blood cells at 
a proper level, and to prevent pur¬ 
pura which is characteristic in some 
forms of leukemia. Antibiotics may 
also be used to prevent secondary' 
infection. 

LEUKOCYTES, the colorless blood 
cells, generally called white blood 
cells or corpuscles. The blood con¬ 
tains several varieties of leukocytes 
which can be differentiated and 
counted by straining and other tech¬ 
niques, iucluding observation under 
the microscope. 

The number of leukocytes in a 
person’s body varies over a lifetime 
and during the course of a single 
day. More leukocirtes are present in 
childhood and in pregnancy. After 
meals an increase of leukoc 3 d:es oc¬ 
curs, due to an increase in the num¬ 
ber of lymphoc 5 rtes from the lymph 
glands. Any increase in the number 
of leukocytes is known as leuko¬ 
cytosis. In disease this is serious; 
leukemia is one of the most critical 
diseases affecting the blood. 

In certain diseases, such as granu¬ 
locytosis, leukocytes are almost to¬ 
tally absent from the blood. Sensitiv¬ 
ity to certain toxic drugs may cause 
complete absence of leukocytes; and, 
since these cells are essential to re- 


483 



LEUKOPLAKIA 

sist infection, their absence may be 
fatal. In typhoid fever and certain 
other diseases, the number of leuko¬ 
cytes may fall below normal, a condi¬ 
tion known as leukopenia. In cases 
in which it is desirable to increase 
the number of leukocytes, certain 
drugs and serums may be injected. 
See also blood; leukemia. 

LEUKOPLAKIA, a disease affecting 
middle-aged or elderly persons, in 
which white patches develop on the 
tongue and on the inside of the 
cheeks and the gums. The exact cause 
of leukoplakia is unknown, but the 
condition has been associated with 
excessive smoking and was once 
known as “smoker’s patch.” Leuko¬ 
plakia has also been related to drink¬ 
ing and, in some instances, syphilis. 
However, many cases do not suggest 
any apparent relationship to any of 
these alleged causes. 

In time the patches become pain¬ 
ful, especially in swallowing and 
talking. Continuous irritation is 
sometimes followed by cancer. Smok¬ 
ing and liquor, condiments and hot 
food must be avoided. Treatment 
by x-rays or radium and the applica¬ 
tion of antiseptics have been bene¬ 
ficial. 

LIBIDO, sexual desire; the term also 
refers to the energy derived from the 
primitive impulses. In psychoanalysis, 
libido refers to the motivating drive 
of the ^x Hfe. In Freudian psy¬ 
chology, it denotes psychic energy in 
general. 

LICE, small wingless flat insects 
which live on the skin of birds, mam- 


L!CE 

mals, and human bemgs. They pro¬ 
duce irritating dermatitis and are 
capable of carrying disease. Three 
kinds of lice may infest the human 
body and cause discomfort and dis¬ 
ease: the head louse, the clothes or 
body louse, and the crab louse. Pedic¬ 
ulosis is the technical name for lice 
infestation. 

The head louse is especially com¬ 
mon among children, spreading rap¬ 
idly. This insect lives only among the 
hairs of the head. It is small, crawl¬ 
ing, gray in color, and visible. It 
lays its eggs, or nits, on the hairs 
to which they become attached. The 
eggs can be slid up or down the hair, 
and are best removed by sliding them 
off at the ends of the hairs. The eggs 
hatch in from six to sixteen days and 
the new lice mature in the next eight 
to sixteen days. Head lice cause in¬ 
tense itching. The discomfort leads 
to scratching which may result in 
infection. Further complications, 
such as impetigo of the scalp and en¬ 
largement and even abscess of the 
neck glands, may also result. At the 
first sign of head lice or nits, the 
scalp must be disinfected to avoid 
the further multiplication of the lice. 
Treatment includes killing the lice 
and nits with a chemical, followed by 
combing the hair with a fine strong 
comb. A 2 per cent DDT emulsion 
or any of the chemicals used in 
scabies will kill lice. Many prepara¬ 
tions are available in drug stores. 

Body lice are comparatively rare, 
being foimd in crowded unsanitary 
places. During World War H, DDT 
was a significant factor in mass lice 
control. Typhus and other fevers are 


484 



LIGAMENTS 


LIMPING, INTERMITTENT 


carried by body lice and the use of 
DDT on a large scale has brought 
these diseases under control. A thor¬ 
ough washing with hot water and 
soap, followed by the use of a dis¬ 
infectant ointment, usually will rid 
the body of lice. It is more difficult 
to remove lice from clothes and bed¬ 
ding, and steaming or boding the 
articles may be necessary. 

The crab louse infests chiefly the 
hairy parts of the body, such as the 
genitals or armpits. It also lays eggs 
which adhere to the hair. Both lice 
and nits are small but visible. A 10 
per cent DDT powder rubbed in thor¬ 
oughly, or a 4 per cent DDT solu¬ 
tion in liquid paraffin will destroy 
crab lice. As in scabies, an emulsion 
of benzyl benzoate is also effective. 
After a hot bath with plenty of soap, 
the emulsion should be brushed thor¬ 
oughly into the affected parts. An¬ 
other precaution is to clip the hair 
short. Soiled pajamas, undergar¬ 
ments, and other clothing should be 
soaked in an antiseptic solution and 
laundered. See also body lice; crab 
lice; ddt; typhus. 

LIGAMENTS, tough fibrous bands 
of tissue connecting bones at the 
joints and holding them in place. 
They do not stretch, but are placed 
in an interlacing arrangement so that 
they permit the movements required 
at ffiese poinits. Another type of liga¬ 
ment, which is really modified peri¬ 
toneal tissue, holds the major organs 
in place. An elastic form of ligament 
is found at the vertebrae, where con¬ 
siderable range of movement is re¬ 
quired, as in bending the back. Here 


the ligaments stretch and then be¬ 
come taut, keeping the parts steady. 

Ligaments can be torn from the 
bones at the points where they are 
attached, or otherwise damaged. 
They may heal of themselves if the 
part that has been injured is im¬ 
mobilized. In some cases surgery may 
be imperative to bring together tom 
ends of ligaments. Plastic surgery is 
also employed to restore motion in 
cases of paralysis by transferring liga¬ 
ments from one part of the body to 
another. See also joints and joint 
disorders; sprains. 

LIGATION, tying off of a blood ves¬ 
sel to constrict it, or the application 
of any t}rpe of ligature, either cord 
or thread. Ligation is often indicated 
in surgery and may be required in 
cases of accidental bleeding. Some¬ 
times warts, piles, or small tumors 
are constricted by a ligature at the 
point of attachment to the body. Cat¬ 
gut, usually used as a ligature in sur¬ 
gery, is readily absorbed into the tis¬ 
sue. Sterile linen or silk are also 
used as ligatures m various types of 
operations. 

LIMPING, INTERMITEENT, or 
intermittent claudication, a symptom 
of disturbance in the circulation of 
the blood vessels of the legs; it may 
result from disease or inflammation 
or hardening of the blood vessels. 
The first symptoms may be numbness, 
tingling and burning sensations in 
the toes, and in some cases a heavy 
painful feeling, cramps and weakness 
in the legs and feet. When the con¬ 
dition is severe, cramping pains are 


485 



LIMIMENT 


LIPS 


felt in the muscle of the calf, caus¬ 
ing a lump when walking. 

Intermittent claudication results 
from narrowing of the blood vessels 
and failure of the circulatory system 
to function properly in supplying 
blood to the leg. Rest will deviate 
the pain. 

Intermittent limping is a particular 
symptom of Buerger’s disease. Other 
disorders associated with limping are 
dislocation of the hip, breakdown of 
the arch, various nervous and muscu¬ 
lar disorders, and even ill-fitting 
shoes. All require diagnosis and treat¬ 
ment by a specialist in orthopedics. 
To treat limping, a thorough study of 
the circulation is made. Color of the 
skin is associated with circulation, 
and a test is made by raising the leg 
and flexing the foot toward the knee; 
if circulation is adequate, the color 
will return when the leg is lowered 
to a normal position. 

LINIMENT, an oily preparation 
which is rubbed into the skin to help 
circiilatioiij relieve pain, and pro¬ 
mote the cure of stiffness and inflam¬ 
mation* There are many different 
types of liniments, including the ano¬ 
dyne or pain-relieving liniments 
which contain aconite, belladonna, 
and opium; liniments mixed with ir- 
ntants that cause redness of the skin 
and stimulate circulation, including 
those containing ammonia, camphor, 
mustard, soap, and turpentine; chloro¬ 
form liniments which are both 
pain-relieving and stimidating to 
the circulation; calcium oxide or Ume 
liniments which soothe inflamed areas; 
and liniments compounded with mer¬ 
cury and potassium iodide which 


both stimulate the circulation and 
help reduce swelling and inflamma¬ 
tion. 

All these types of liniments are 
liquid except the last which is a soft 
solid and may be applied with a fine 
cloth. Liniments are helpful primarily 
because of the vigor with which they 
are applied, and are not specifically 
curative of any condition. 

LIPOMA, a fatty tumor or a tumor 
made of fatty cells. Although lipomas 
are painless and not malignant, they 
are unsightly and may become the 
seat of gangrene or fat necrosis. 
If infected or annoying, they should 
be removed by surgery. 



ypomo—A lipoma Is a type of tumor which 
contains fatty tissue, lipomas frequently 
affect the area beneath the chin, end they 
do not move on swallowing. 

LDPS, the two fleshy folds surround¬ 
ing the cavity of the mouth. They 
are composed of the skin covering 
the outer surface, mucous membrane 
covering the inner portion, connec¬ 
tive tissue, and a ring of muscular 


486 



LIVER 


OVER 


tissue and the artery that supplies 
biood« The functions of the lips in¬ 
clude feeding and speech. 

Harelip, a congenital condition, re¬ 
sults from failure of the lips to grow 
together properly and is a serious 
and often unsightly handicap. Plastic 
surgery performed in early infancy 
is most effective in correcting it. An¬ 
other condition of the lips which is 
successfully treated by surgery is 
overgrowth of the glandular tissue, 
which ordinarily results in enlarge¬ 
ment of the upper lip. 

Chapping or inflammation of the 
lips is often due to exposure to sun, 
wind and cold. Sensitivity to chemi¬ 
cal ingredients of lipstick may also 
produce similar conditions. Cracking 
of the lips may follow. A protective 
ointment helps give relief. 

A deficiency of riboflavin provokes 
cracking and blistering in the comers 
of the mouth. Supplementary vita¬ 
mins together with careful hygiene 
and protective ointments usually cure 
the condition. 

More serious are carbuncles and 
abscess of the upper lip. Because 
of the presence of large blood ves¬ 
sels in this area, care must be taken 
to prevent spread of infection to 
vital parts of the body. Use of sulfa 
drugs and antibiotics has greatly re¬ 
duced the danger of this condition, 
which was formerly fatal in some 
cases. 

Also serious is cancer of the Hp 
which may be induced by chronic 
irritation, as in pipe smoking. Early 
detection and treatment by surgery 
is imperative; treatment by irradia¬ 
tion or electric coagulation or a com¬ 


bination of both has proved effective. 

In the common cold and in fever, 
blisters known as herpes frequently 
form on the margins of the lips 
Nervousness in meostiuatlon and 
sensitivity to certain foods may also 
induce blisters. See also harelip; 
HEBPES simplex; HERPES ZOSTER. 

LWERj the largest gland, and one 
of the largest organs in the human 
body; it is located in the upper right 
abdomen, immediately under the 
diaphragm and attached to it by liga¬ 
ments. 

The liver is involved in many sig¬ 
nificant body processes, such as af¬ 
fording protection from disease, 
supplying sugar to meet the needs of 
muscle tissues, and regulating clotting 
of the blood. It weighs three to four 
pounds in the adult male, and is es¬ 
timated to be approximately seven 
times larger than requisite, thus as¬ 
suring the body of a substantial safety 
factor when liver functions are con¬ 
cerned. In addition, the liver pos¬ 
sesses special power of regeneration. 
After being damaged, it can regen¬ 
erate its own tissue almost immedi¬ 
ately. 

The digestive process is especially 
closely related to the liver. Every 
vein from every part of the digestive 
tract empties into the liver through 
the portal vein. The proteins, sugars, 
and starches absorbed by the Mood 
vessels of the stomach, by the small 
and large intestines and the pancreas 
are brought to the liver in the blood. 
These products result from the diges¬ 
tion of meats, starches, and sugars 
consumed as food. 


487 



LIVER 


LIVER 


Among its other activities, the liver 
produces and distributes a pint or 
more of bile every twenty-four hours. 
Bile is a bitter-tasting, yellowish 
golden or brown fluid which is 
strongly alkaline and thus neutralizes 
the acid which enters the duodenum 
from the stomach. The bile is com¬ 
posed largely of bile salts and bile 
pigments. Bile salts assist in breaking 
down food fats in the intestine and 
in the absorption of fat through the 
intestinal wall. The fats are not ex¬ 
creted, but are absorbed in the in¬ 
testinal wall and reused. 

Bile pigments are derived from 
hemoglobin of discarded red blood 
cells, excreted with the solid waste 
of the body. The term “jaundice” 
arises from the yellowish cast which 
bile pigments give the mucous mem¬ 
branes and the conjunctiva of the 
eye when they circulate in abnormal 
amounts m the blood. Bile is con¬ 
tinually produced by the liver. Among 
other functions it serves as the 
medium for excreting various harm¬ 
ful substances which the liver re¬ 
moves from the blood. 

A bile duct, formed by the jo inin g 
of two lesser ducts, carries bile from 
the liver to the duodenum. On the 
way, part of the bile is deposited as a 
reserve in the gallbladder, where it is 
concentrated by the absorption of 
moisture into the walls of the gall¬ 
bladder. This organ supplies bile to 
the intestine after the passage of food 
into the small intestine from the stom¬ 
ach. When solid substances in the 
bUe precipitate and settle they form 
gallstones, which may vary consid¬ 
erably in color, size, and consistency. 


depending on their exact composition. 

The liver takes sugar from the 
blood and stores it as glycogen, which 
is quickly converted back to sugar 
when it is needed by the body, espe¬ 
cially the muscles. The liver pro¬ 
duces urea, which is taken by the 
blood to the kidneys for excretion. 
The liver also forms fibrinogen and 
antithrombin, two substances essen¬ 
tial to normal conditions m the blood 
and in its clotting. Fibrinogen forms 
a clot, Antithrombin prevents the 
constant disintegration of the white 
blood cells and prevents coagulation 
of the circulating blood, which is ex¬ 
tremely dangerous. 

Another vital biochemical activity 
of the liver is the formation of many 
antibodies, the substances developed 
by the body to counteract invasive 
organisms and their toxins. The liver 
synthesizes proteins, stores copper 
and iron, and produces both vit amin 
A and one of the ingredients essen¬ 
tial to the creation of the red blood 
cells. 

Since it is so crucial in the func¬ 
tioning of the body, a serious condi¬ 
tion results when the liver becomes 
infected, inflamed, or otherwise dis¬ 
ordered. One significant factor is the 
effect of the liver on the body’s sugar 
supply. Liver cells respond to major 
damage by discharging their glyco¬ 
gen. Injection of glucose may then 
be indicated to supply the required 
sugar. This in turn may demand the 
injection of insulin to assist the body 
in taking care of the replenishment 
of sugar. Unusual fatigue, listlessness, 
drowsiness, and confusion are symp- 


488 



LIVER, COMMON DISEASES OF 

toms of a relative lack of sugar or, 
often, a relative excess of insulin. 
The same circumstance may arise 
from sources other than liver damage, 
and the cause can be established 
when the quantity of sugar in the 
blood is checked. 

Among the serious diseases of the 
liver are cirrhosis, or hardening; at¬ 
rophy, or wasting; overgrowth; and 
bacterial or parasitic infection, which 
cause abscesses. Recent research in¬ 
dicates that the liver is vulnerable to 
dietary deficiencies, especially those 
of vitamins. Vitamin deficiencies may 
be associated with hardening of the 
liver. 

Acute hepatitis is a form of liver 
disease caused by a viral infection, 
and the proper diagnosis is urgent, 
since the symptoms often resemble 
other disorders. Fatal complications 
may ensue with little or no warning. 

Abscesses in the liver may origi¬ 
nate from infection by amebae, as in 
amebiasis, or from a general infec¬ 
tion of the blood, as in pyemia. Ab¬ 
scesses caused by amebae are more 
serious, since they tend to be single 
rather than multiple, and thus to 
concentrate their virulence in one 
spot in the liver. Frequently, though 
not invariably, the history of the 
patient reveals previous dysenteric in¬ 
fection. Usually a liver abscess must 
be treated surgically. It must be ex¬ 
posed and cleansed or it is likely to 
rupture and empty its contents into 
the abdominal cavity and result in 
peritonitis which might be fatal. 
Sometimes an operation is advisable 
to establish the actual existence of an 


LIVER, COMMON DISEASES OF 

abscess. Operative treatment is ac- 

companied by injection of amefaicida! 

drugs. 

The proportion of fat in the liver 
is increased by its reaction to various 
poisons, to a high-fat diet, sometimes 
to general obesity or chronic alcohol¬ 
ism. In reacting to poisons, the Ever 
replaces functioning cells with fat. 
Storage of fat in the liver occurs 
with an overfatty diet. Carbon tetra¬ 
chloride, a common drycleaning sub¬ 
stance, phosphorus, arsenic, and chlo¬ 
roform are aU particularly damaging 
to the liver. See also alcoholism; 
bile; cirrhosis; hepatitis; jaun¬ 
dice. 

LIVER, COMMON DISEASES OF* 
Acute viral hepatitis is perhaps the 
most frequently encountered dis¬ 
order of the liver. Until recently 
what we know as viral hepatitis was 
called acute catarrhal jaundice or 
acute infectious jaundice. Now a 
specific virus is recognized as the 
cause of the disease. At least two 
forms of this virus are known: one 
which enters the body through the 
mouth, nose, and throat in the same 
manner as that of such common in¬ 
fections as colds; and the other 
which enters the body directly into 
the blood as with blood transfusions 
and injections. The first type is 
known as infectious hepatitis and 
the second as serum hepatitB. 

Infectious hepatitis can occur at 
any age but is most commonly a 
disease of children and young adults. 
Because the virus is found in tre¬ 
mendous numbers in the stools of 


489 



LIVER, COMMOM DISEASES OF 


LIVER, COMMON DISEASES OF 


people suffering from hepatitis, the 
infection may spread from contami¬ 
nation of water supplies by un¬ 
treated sewage or from improper 
sanitation in the bathroom of the 
home. Acute infectious hepatitis is 
commonly epidemic where large 
numbers of young adults congregate, 
such as m army camps and institu¬ 
tions. However, the condition oc¬ 
curs m isolated cases anywhere at 
any time. The disease usually begins 
suddenly, with chills, fever, nausea, 
diarrhea, and the appearance in a 
tew days of jaundice. The violence 
of the acute onset or the visible 
jaundice causes the person to call a 
physician early in the course of the 
disease. With proper treatment, the 
disease is generally limited from two 
to six weeks and heals without per¬ 
manent injury to the liver. In a small 
number of persons, the disease may 
become serious or even critical. Al¬ 
so, in a small percentage, healing 
may be incomplete and liver func¬ 
tion may never return to its normal 
level. 

Serum hepatitis is a disease pe¬ 
culiar to modern-day medicine. 
Since the virus must enter the body 
through the blood, it must be car¬ 
ried into the blood by some instru¬ 
ment such as a needle used for in¬ 
jection. The virus of serum hepatitis 
exists in the blood stream of some 
people without producing a disease 
and without producing any sign 
which would indicate its presence. 
If such a person donates his blood 
for blood transfusion, that blood will 
carry the virus into the blood of the 


person who receives the transfusion. 
Also, if needles and instruments 
which have been in contact with 
the blood of one person are not 
carefully sterilized, they may be a 
source of infection to another per¬ 
son. Serum hepatitis comes on more 
gradually than infectious hepatitis. 
The first symptoms are usually loss 
of appetite, tiredness, indigestion, 
and perhaps a mild degree of fever. 
After a few days to a week, jaun¬ 
dice may appear. However, in spite 
of the milder beginning symptoms 
of serum hepatitis, the condition is a 
good deal more serious than infec¬ 
tious hepatitis. Many months may 
be required for recovery to be com¬ 
plete. In some instances, the liver 
is so badly damaged that complete 
recovery never occurs. In spite of 
the great care with which blood 
donors are selected, physicians have 
not been able to discover how to 
prevent serum hepatitis from occur¬ 
ring in about one out of every 300 
blood transfusions. Some types of 
serums made from human blood 
have also been responsible for trans¬ 
mitting this disease. The virus is not 
killed by freezing or by chemical an¬ 
tiseptics. It cannot, however, survive 
for long at room temperature and is 
killed by ultraviolet light. Ultraviolet 
light has been used to safeguard 
blood serums but whole human 
blood cannot be safeguarded in this 
manner. A usually mild form of 
virus hepatitis may occur in associa¬ 
tion with glandular fever, known as 
infectious mononucleosis. The im¬ 
pairment of liver function and jaun- 


490 



liver extracts 


LiVEi SPOTS 


dice m glandular fever is rarely a 
cause for concern. 

Secondary hepatitis. Secondary in¬ 
fections of the liver occur as the re¬ 
sult of the invasion of the body or 
blood stream by a wide variety of 
germs. In addition, invasion of the 
liver from the intestinal tract by cer¬ 
tain types of parasites, such as ame- 
bae, flukes, and worms, will pro¬ 
duce a form of hepatitis. In all 
these instances, the treatment of the 
primary infection is essential to the 
cure of the liver disease. In some in¬ 
stances of secondary hepatitis, ab¬ 
scesses may form within the liver 
and on occasion require surgical 
drainage. 

Toxic hepatitis. Another form of 
hepatitis is caused by chemical 
agents such as alcohol, cleaning fluid 
containing carbon tetrachloride, 
chloroform, arsenic, and a wide 
variety of drugs to which a person 
may be sensitive. This condition is 
called toxic hepatitis. It too is asso¬ 
ciated with loss of appetite, loss of 
weight, indigestion, and jaundice. 
Excessive alcoholic intake can pro¬ 
duce definite measurable injury to 
liver cells, but does not do so al¬ 
ways. Probably a chronic alcoholic 
develops liver disease because he 
prefers to drink rather than eat and 
the resulting deficiency of proper 
foods and vitamins, in addition to 
the poisonous effect of alcohol, pro¬ 
duces serious injury of the liver. 

The large majority of cases of 
acute disease of the liver produced 
by infection or chemical poisoning 
have a tendency to heal. Only a 


small number develop serious chron¬ 
ic disability. 

Chronic hepatitis, which is a con¬ 
tinuation of the same changes that 
occur in acute diseases of the liver, 
occurs when infection has destroyed 
so much of the tissue of the liver 
that complete healing is impossible. 
The resulting disturbances of func¬ 
tion of the liver are sufficient to give 
rise to long-standing symptoms such 
as chronic fatigue, poor appetite, 
failure to gain weight and, at times, 
visible jaundice. The physician finds 
the liver is enlarged, tender, and 
perhaps firmer than normal. With 
the aid of studies of the blood, urine, 
and stool, the defect in the function 
of the liver can be measured, just as 
in the case of acute hepatitis. See 

also HEPATITIS. 

LIVER IXTRACTS, pharmaceutical 
preparations containing soluble frac¬ 
tions of mammalian livers or solution 
of liver and purified solution of liver. 
The liver contains a substance which 
stimulates the formation of red blood 
corpuscles. Persons with pemidous 
anemia are successfully treated with 
intramuscular injections of M^y 
concentrated liver extracts, which in¬ 
crease the number of red Mood cor¬ 
puscles in their blood. See aka 

ANEMIA. 

LIVER SPOTSj or cMoasma, yelow 
and brownish spots and discolorations 
in patches on the skin. They may 
occur in pregnancy, tuberculosis, and 
digestive disturbances. They may also 
follow exposure to sun or heat and 
may appear in areas where pressure 


491 



OVER, COMMON DISEASES OF 


LIVER, COMMON DISEASES OF 


people suffering from hepatitis, the 
infection may spread from contami¬ 
nation of water supplies by un¬ 
treated sewage or from improper 
sanitation in the bathroom of the 
home. Acute infectious hepatitis is 
commonly epidemic where large 
numbers of young adults congregate, 
such as m army camps and institu¬ 
tions. However, the condition oc¬ 
curs in isolated cases anywhere at 
any time. The disease usually begins 
suddenly, with chills, fever, nausea, 
diarrhea, and the appearance in a 
tew days of jaundice. The violence 
of the acute onset or the visible 
jaundice causes the person to call a 
physician early in the course of the 
disease. With proper treatment, the 
disease is generally limited from two 
to six weeks and heals without per¬ 
manent injury to the liver. In a small 
number of persons, the disease may 
become serious or even critical. Al¬ 
so, in a small percentage, healing 
may be incomplete and liver func¬ 
tion may never return to its normal 
level. 

Serum hepatitis is a disease pe¬ 
culiar to modern-day medicine. 
Since the virus must enter the body 
through the blood, it must be car¬ 
ried into the blood by some instru¬ 
ment such as a needle used for in¬ 
jection. The virus of serum hepatitis 
exists in the blood stream of some 
people without producing a disease 
and without producing any sign 
which would indicate its presence. 
If such a person donates his blood 
for blood transfusion, that blood will 
carry the virus into the blood of the 


person who receives the transfusion. 
Also, if needles and instruments 
which have been in contact with 
the blood of one person are not 
carefully sterilized, they may be a 
source of infection to another per¬ 
son. Serum hepatitis comes on more 
gradually than infectious hepatitis. 
The first symptoms are usually loss 
of appetite, tiredness, indigestion, 
and perhaps a mild degree of fever. 
After a few days to a week, jaun¬ 
dice may appear. However, in spite 
of the milder beginning symptoms 
of serum hepatitis, the condition is a 
good deal more serious than infec¬ 
tious hepatitis. Many months may 
be required for recovery to be com¬ 
plete. In some instances, the liver 
is so badly damaged that complete 
recovery never occurs. In spite of 
the great care with which blood 
donors are selected, physicians have 
not been able to discover how to 
prevent serum hepatitis from occur¬ 
ring in about one out of every 300 
blood transfusions. Some types of 
serums made from human blood 
have also been responsible for trans¬ 
mitting this disease. The virus is not 
killed by freezing or by chemical an¬ 
tiseptics. It cannot, however, survive 
for long at room temperature and is 
killed by ultraviolet light. Ultraviolet 
light has been used to safeguard 
blood serums but whole human 
blood cannot be safeguarded in this 
manner. A usually mild form of 
virus hepatitis may occur in associa¬ 
tion with glandular fever, known as 
infectious mononucleosis. The im¬ 
pairment of liver function and jaun- 


490 



LIVE! EXTRACTS 


LiVEi SPOTS 


dice in glandular fever is rarely a 
cause for concern. 

Secondary hepatitis. Secondary in¬ 
fections of the liver occur as the re¬ 
sult of the invasion of the body or 
blood stream by a wide variety of 
germs. In addition, invasion of the 
liver from the intestinal tract by cer¬ 
tain types of parasites, such as ame- 
bae, flukes, and worms, will pro¬ 
duce a form of hepatitis. In all 
these instances, the treatment of the 
primary infection is essential to the 
cure of the liver disease. In some in¬ 
stances of secondary hepatitis, ab¬ 
scesses may form within the liver 
and on occasion require surgical 
drainage. 

Toxic hepatitis. Another form of 
hepatitis is caused by chemical 
agents such as alcohol, cleaning fluid 
containing carbon tetrachloride, 
chloroform, arsenic, and a wide 
variety of drugs to which a person 
may be sensitive. This condition is 
called toxic hepatitis. It too is asso¬ 
ciated with loss of appetite, loss of 
weight, indigestion, and jaundice. 
Excessive alcoholic intake can pro¬ 
duce definite measurable injury to 
liver cells, but does not do so al¬ 
ways. Probably a chronic alcoholic 
develops liver disease because he 
prefers to drink rather than eat and 
the resulting deficiency of proper 
foods and vitamins, in addition to 
the poisonous effect of alcohol, pro¬ 
duces serious injury of the liver. 

The large majority of cases of 
acute disease of the liver produced 
by infection or chemical poisoning 
have a tendency to heal. Only a 


small number develop serious chron¬ 
ic disability. 

Chronic hepatitis, which is a con¬ 
tinuation of the same changes that 
occur in acute diseases of the liver, 
occurs when infection has destroyed 
so much of the tissue of the liver 
that complete healing is impossible. 
The resulting disturbances of func¬ 
tion of the liver are sufficient to give 
rise to long-standing symptoms such 
as chronic fatigue, poor appetite, 
failure to gain weight and, at times, 
visible jaundice. The physician finds 
the liver is enlarged, tender, and 
perhaps firmer than normal With 
the aid of studies of the blood, urine, 
and stool, the defect in the function 
of the liver can be measured, just as 
in the case of acute hepatitis. See 
also HEPATITIS. 

LIVER EXTRACTS, pharmaceutical 
preparations containing soluble frac¬ 
tions of mammalian livem or solution 
of liver and purified solution of liver. 
The liver contains a substance which 
stimulates the formation of red Mood 
corpuscles. Persons with pernicious 
anemia are successfully treated with 
intramuscular injections of highly 
concentrated liver extracts, which in¬ 
crease the number of red blood cor¬ 
puscles in their blood. See also 

ANEMIA- 

LIVER SPOTS, or chloasma, yellow 
and brownish spots and discolorations 
in patches on the skin. They may 
occur in pregnancy, tuberculosis, and 
digestive disturbances. They may also 
follow exposure to sun or heat and 
may appear in areas where pressure 


491 



LUMPY JAW 


LUNGS 


Lumbago can generally be cured 
by heat from a hot-water bottle, heat¬ 
ing pad, infrared ray, or with dia¬ 
thermy. Drugs such as aspirin may be 
taken or the doctor may inject a 
locd anesthetic to be followed by 
limited movement and rest periods. 
Repeated attacks of lumbago may be 
due to an infection elsewhere in the 
body which the doctor will try to 
locate. See also low back pain. 

“LUMPY JAW.” See actinomyco¬ 
sis. 

LUNGS, the respiratory organs. The 
lungs lie on either side of the chest 
and occupy a large part of the chest 



494 


cavity. The right lung is larger than 
the left and contains three parts or 
lobes, whereas the left lung has only 

two lobes. 

StTuctiiTB and functiofie The gen* 

eral structure of the lung resembles 
that of an inverted tree. The main 
stem is represented by the bronchus, 
which leads into the lung from the 
windpipe and subdivides into smaller 
and smaller branches or tubes, end¬ 
ing in the minute ones called the 
bronchioles. These lead to the alveoli 
or air sacs on the surface of which 
are the capillaries. 

Blood is suppUed to the capillaries 
by the pulmonary artery, and carried 
off by the pulmonary veins. Lym¬ 
phatic vessels also pass through the 
lungs, which are covered by the 
pleura, a membrane. 

Primarily the function of the lungs 

is to provide oxygen to the red blood 
cells and to eliminate carbon dioxide. 
In the rest of the body the capillaries 
e^end oxygen and take up carbon 
dioxide, whereas in the lungs the 
capillaries take up oxygen and throw 
off carbon dioxide. 

In the course of twenty-four hours’ 
breathing, an active man absorbs 
more than twenty cubic feet of oxy¬ 
gen, and his blood emits more than 
twenty cubic feet of carbon dioxide. 
The lungs normally take in air and 
expel waste products seventeen times 
a minute, and can speed up to 
seventy or eighty times a minute 

file cut surfaces 
of the lungs with the lungs in place. The 
heart hos been removed. The lungs tend to 
get gray m the city dweller because dust 
porticles are trapped and stored there. 



LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS 


lymphatic system 



Lyngs—The anatomy of the lung, the most 
important organ of respiration. There is a 
right lung and a left lung, with the former 
being somewhat larger. When the bronchus 
enters the Sung it divides into many small 
branches called bronchial tubes. The lung 
is soft and spongy and contains countless 
tiny air sacs (alveoli), lung tissue is pink in 
children and gray to black in adults. 

during extreme muscular effort or in 
pneumonia. 

Diseases of the Lungs. Tuberculosis 
and pneumonia are among the most 
serious diseases infecting the limgs. 
Other infections may cause bronchitis 
and bronchiectasis. The lungs may be 
affected by various viruses, by para¬ 
sites and fungi, and by different 
poisons and dusts found in industry. 
Certain other disorders like abscess 
and emphysema or dilation of the air 
cells may invade one or both lungs. 

During the last twenty-five years, 


cancer of the lung has considerably 
increased in incidence, and is now 
the most common form of internal 
cancer among men, in whom it is 
more likely to occur than in women. 

Removal of the lung is usually the 
preferred treatment for patients with 
cancer of the lung. Unfortunately, 
however, detection in a large per¬ 
centage of cases is too late for this 
means of control of lung cancer. 

Advances in surgical techniques, 
in anesthetics, and in the use of 
antibiotics have made surgery on the 
lungs more possible and successful 
than it once was, and the death rate 
has now been decreased. See also 
aspiration; asthma; bronchitis; 
bronchopneumonia; chest; em¬ 
physema; pleurisy; pneumonia; 
tuberculosis. 

LUPUS erythematosus, usu¬ 
ally a chronic, but sometimes severe 
acute disease, marked by the appear¬ 
ance of red scaly patches of various 
sizes on the skin. 

The disease may seriously affect 
the internal organs. Infusion into the 
joints may occur, and the toxic effects 
may be extreme, sometimes fatal. 
This acute form of er 5 dhema requires 
drastic treatment. The use of ACTH 
and cortisone, and the injection of 
gold salts have been found effective 
in many cases. See also erythema. 

LYMPHATIC SYSTEM, an inter¬ 
connected series of spaces, ducts, and 
glands within the body which carry 
lymph, a fluid which is constantly 
being circulated throughout the body. 
Lymph is similar in composition to 
a clear dilute blood plasma without 


495 








MADURA FOOT 9 a chronic fungus 
infection usually limited to the feet 
although occasionally it attacks the 
hands or other parts of the body. This 
disease was first described by Henry 
Vandyke Carter while he was work¬ 
ing in Madura^ India. Madura foot, 
or mycetoma, is most prevalent in 
India, China, and Africa, but sporadic 
cases have been reported in Italy 
and Greece and the United States. 

Madura foot is caused by a number 
of different fungi which enter the 
foot through a minor cut or abrasion 
in the skin. The skin grows discolored 
and boggy as the fungus eats its way 
into the deep tissues, forming open 
sores, and the foot becomes swollen 
and deformed. The disease progresses 
slowly, gradually invading the bony 
structure of the foot and causing 
crippling deformities. The graphic 
term, jungle rot, denotes a condition 
in wMch deep open sores break down 
skin tissue, regardless of the cause. 
The infection is usually confined to 
the foot. 


When treatment is begun early, the 
ailment is greatly benefited by huge 
doses of the sulfonamides. Deeper 
abscesses are removed by curettage. 

MAGNESIUM CITRATE. Mag¬ 
nesium is a bluish white, hard but 
malleable metal, widely present in 
organic and inorganic nature. As a 
component of muscles, bones, body 
fluids, and tissues, it is vital to life. 
Its salts, magnesium citrate, are used 
in medicine. Magnesium citrate is a 
popular mild laxative, which should 
be taken upon arising in doses pre¬ 
scribed by the doctor. 

MALARIA includes a group of dis¬ 
eases which are manifested by peri¬ 
odic attacks of chills, fever, and 
sweating. The disease is transmitted 
by the anopheles mosquito in a rather 
complex manner. A female mosquito 
must bite a person whose Hood al¬ 
ready contains both the male and 
female malaria parasites. These para¬ 
sites enter the body of the mosquito 
where they undergo fertilization, the 


498 



MAMMARY GLANDS 

male parasite ejecting small filaments 
which break loose and come into 
contact with the female parasite. The 
fertilized forms then leave the stom¬ 
ach cells and gradually enlarge until 
finally they rupture into the body 
cavity of the mosquito and make their 
way to the salivary glands. When the 
mosquito bites another person, these 
parasites pass with the mosquito’s 
saliva and start the development of 
the parasite in the person who has 
been bitten. About ten days later, 
parasites can be observed in the red 
Mood cells of the infected person. 
This parasite devours the red pig¬ 
ment and iron-containing material; 
the red cell ruptures and parasites are 
released which attach themselves to 
new red ceils. There are various other 

types of the parasite which produce 

different forms of malaria. 

On about the fourteenth day after 
infection, the person will have back¬ 
ache, muscle soreness, and fever with 
paroxysms and chills. Paroxysms 
occur on alternate days when there 
are two types of the same parasite 
developing in the blood, which gives 
the condition a cold, a hot, and a 
sweating stage. The cold stage is 
characterized by chills with chattering 
teeth, uncontrollable shaking, and 
cold bluish skin. Then comes a high 
fever followed by sweating, when the 
temperature drops to normal. 

In quartan malaria there is a four- 
day interval between the sets of symp¬ 
toms. In falciparum malaria, which 
has an mcubation period of about 
twelve days, the fever is high and 
irregular, and bleeding, including 
Mood in the urine, frequently occurs. 


MANIC-DEPRESSIVE PSYCHOSIS 

The physician determines the type 
of maliria from a siud> of the h!eod 
and from the symptoms and the order 
in which they occur. Quinine and 
camoqoin and fotaquioe are drugs 
used to prevent malaria. These plus 
atabrine, quinacrioe, cfaloraquinc, 
and primaquine are used in the treat¬ 
ment of malaria. Fresentlon of ma¬ 
laria depends ultimately on the con¬ 
trol of the anopheles mosquito. la 
areas where the anopheles is present, 
swamps must be cleaned out, breed¬ 
ing places sprayed with insecticide, 
and water not allowed to accumulate. 
In tropical regions, people who are 
constantly exposed to malaria should 
take quinine every day one hour be¬ 
fore sunset, screen their beds at night 
and keep the air moving, and wear 
suitable protective clothing. Very" 
powerful and effective insect re¬ 
pellents are available today which 
help in the fight against the spread of 
the anopheles. 

M\MMARY GLANDS, the scien¬ 
tific name tor the breasts. See bri \si 

MANIC-DEPRESSIVE PSYCHO¬ 
SIS- A psychosis is a serious mental 
illness and manic-depressive psycho¬ 
sis is a form of such mental disturb¬ 
ance. It is almost as common as 
schizophrenia, the most frqquent 
mental disorder, and about one-third 
of all the patients in mental institu¬ 
tions belong to this group. Manic- 
depressive psychosis may attack at 
any age, but is more prevalent in the 
age group between twenty and sixty. 
Women are more subject than men, 
comprising about two-thirds of all 
cases. 


499 



MARASMUS 


MARASMUS 


.\l44ric derressbe ps^chosK ^a^ 
K^eii tailed cyclical insanity, because 
n h characterized b\ periodic and 
adcrn tiirg csc'e^ of mania and de- 
fRssiOri. In I he oiam'c phase, the 
person may maiiitest oserabundant 
ener^!}, incessant activity, and ex¬ 
aggerated \\ eli-bemg. Impulsiveness 
and motor excilcment s^ill be pro- 
neuoced, and his ideas lofty and un¬ 
mistakably pleasurable, expressed in 
incessaol talk* His judgment will seem 
disordered and his ability to make 
decisions meak. The mood may sud¬ 
denly change to extreme irritability, 
temper, and anger, and then he may 
give advice and criticism to others 
in an attempt to show Ms superiority. 

As in other psychoses, the afflicted 
person is apt to have lofty goals. The 
manic-depressive psychotic imagines 
that he is an exalted and powerful 
personality, perhaps a great scientist, 
actors king, or savior of mankind. 
He will aggressively demand atten¬ 
tion to his claims, which he may 
express without cessation. During the 
manic phase, he may completely 
change his former moral and ethical 
standards. In most instances, pro- 
nouaced eroticism and sometimes 
alcoholism and drug addiction occur. 

Hypomania or lesser mania is a 
milder form of mania. Here, too, an 
overabundant energy and quest for 
incessaiit activity appear. The per¬ 
son’s humor and talk will be boister¬ 
ous or cMldish and ^ggling. While 
delusions of pandeur are absent, the 
hypomaniac still manif^ts an irritat¬ 
ing and overdone self-«teem. Out¬ 
breaks of anger and irritability are 
frequent. 


The manic phase alternates in 
manic-depressive psychosis with a 
painful emotional condition in which 
the person is dangerously depressed 
and miserable. In this state he will 
be self-derogatory, driven to deep 
despondency by some sense of guilt 
about often Elusory misdeeds and 
sins. He may contemplate suicide, 
considering himself unworthy to live. 
Delusions and hallocmations are 
habitual, and symptoms such as 
sluggishness, mabdity to make de¬ 
cisions, and lack of power of concen¬ 
tration are pronounced. This depres¬ 
sive stage of manic-depressive psy¬ 
chosis may be accompanied by 
physical symptoms such as constipa¬ 
tion, coated tongue, sleeplessness, 
loss of weight, and many others. In¬ 
tellectual activity is suppressed while 
the person is deeply involved in his 
harrowing delusions, and stupor is 
not uncommon. Women become an¬ 
tagonistic to sex and men. 

Manic-depressive attacks, which 
may occur originally from great 
emotional tension, may be short or 
last for many months. If they are 
isolated and infrequent, chance for 
recovery is possible; however, MI 
and complete recovery is rare. 

MARASMUS, a word derived from 
the Greek marasmos or decay, is a 
disease characterized by progressive 
wasting of body tissue of infants. It 
also denotes severe malnutrition due 
to poor diet or protracted intestinal 
disorders that prevent proper utiliza¬ 
tion of food. Only rarely is the under¬ 
lying cause of mar^mus a constitu- 


500 




MARIHUANA 


MARRIAGE 


tionai disease, such as or 

tuberculosis. 

The symptoms of marasmus are 
similar to those of gradual stars atiEon. 
The infant has a low temperature, 
loose skis, in folds, wasted limbs, 
large sunken eyes, ae.d a genera! ap¬ 
pearance of o!d age. Marasmus 
occurs most frequently in bottle-fed 
babies, in slum and unsanitary con¬ 
ditions, and in institutions. 

Treatment, if in time, may restore 
the health of some infants, especially 
those older than six months. Large 
quantities of mother’s milk must be 
given; if necessary it can be procured 
from a mother’s milk bank. If human 
milk is not available, powder or 
evaporated milk may be substituted. 
Vitamins A and B complex, mas¬ 
sages, and an abundance of fresh air 
have been found helpful. 

MARIHUANA^ also known as hash¬ 
ish in the Orient, a habit-forming 
drug. It is the dried leaves and flowers 
of the Indian hemp plant, usually 
smoked in cigarettes. Addiction to 
marihuana is as widespread in the 
United States as in other countries. 
Every country in Asia has a centuries- 
long history of marihuana drug ad¬ 
diction. 

The effects of marihuana have been 
recognized since the beginniiig of 
recorded history—an Assyrian medi¬ 
cal tablet in the Britisli Museum re¬ 
fers to hashish m intoxicmit 
which cheers the spirits and sharpens 
the erotic impulse.” Vivid descrip¬ 
tions of hasMsh debauches abound 
in ancient Arabian literature. Marco 
Polo in Ms discription of his travels 


tells of the desperate band of Persian 

highwasmeii, the who in¬ 

itiated new members into fhe,ir order 
h\ a hcentieus hashish carnivaL if 
has even been suggested that the 
words assassin and hashish are de¬ 
rived from the same root. 

Marihuana or hashish affects Its 
u^ers, is many wap, since it stimu- 
iates the nervous, respiratory, circiila- 
toiyt digestive, everetont and genital 
systems. The drug clouds the mind 
and reduces self-control; the person 
becomes restless and talkati\c, re¬ 
laxed and exhilarated with a sense of 
w^eil-being, followed by drow^siness. 
Generally difficulty in focusing and 
sustainiag mental attention is noted. 

Marihuana has long been a major 
problem for government narcotic 
squads, for the Indian hemp plant 
grows wild in many areas. Smoking 
the drug in the form of **reefers” 
has become increasingly prevalent. 
In 1934, the United States Congress 
enacted legislation which prescribed 
almost as severe penalties for the use 
and sale of marihuana as for nar¬ 
cotics. See also drug addiction. 

MAMMAGE, the physical, personal, 
and legal union between a man and 
woman for the establishment of a 
family. The beginning of marriage is 
a new experience for both partners. 
Sexual adjustment must be made 
and techniques adapted to the needs 
and preferences of the husband and 
wife. Although sex is the biological 
foundation of marriage, many adults 
are misinformed or confined about 
it; the famfly physician can be help- 


501 



MASSAGE 


MASTITIS 


fa! fo the person ifVbo feeh he needs 
gjidance. 

Diilerences exist bctxxeeo men and 
morrieo. \ibiefi afFecI the degree of 
se\ua5 gratificatioa, md for women 
espectaiiy the success of the sexual 
life depends k large measure upon 
the degree of emotional accord en- 
|o\ed with her husband. Sex is of 
course not ali of a marriage; but if 
this area is a source of satisfaction to 
the husband and wife, success in the 
other areas w^iii be more easily as¬ 
sured. See also conception; con¬ 
traception; impotence; orgasm; 

SrCRILITY. 

iVf/iSSAGE| treating the body by 
rubbing and kneading. Ordinarily the 
purpose is fo stimulate circulation or 
to increase suppleness of the muscles. 
The hands are most often used to 
massage^ though mechanical devices 
are available. 

The tjpe of massage employed de¬ 
pends on the purpose. The simplest 
massage is a rhythmic stroking mo¬ 
tion^ applied superficially to relieve 
pain or induce sleep. To encourage 
the flow of blood and lymph, the 
stroking motion is deeper and di¬ 
rected toward 'the center of the body. 
This technique is also effective to re¬ 
lax the muscles and reduce swelling, 
or, when applied in the area of the 
stomach, to provide a substitute for 
the normal contraction and relaxa¬ 
tion of the stomach muscles and thus 
stimulate motion in the intestines. 

In the squeezing type of massage, 
the tissue is pulled up and then 
pressed between the fingers or hands. 
Alternatively the tissue may be 


pressed, not between the hands, but 
between a hand and the bones or 
muscles. This method is often em¬ 
ploy ed to aid in preventing adhesions, 
to stimulate circulation, or to induce 
heat. Circulation may be further en¬ 
couraged if this deep massage is per¬ 
formed with a vibrating motion. Like¬ 
wise the induction of heat is enhanced 
if massage is forceful enough to cause 
friction betw^een the hands and the 
tissues. 

Another style of massage is per¬ 
cussion. This involves using a ham¬ 
mering action with the fingers, the 
side of the hands, or with certain 
instruments. 

If massage does not bring about 
the desired results, medical advice is 
recommended. Massage is best ap¬ 
plied under proper supervision. See 
also osteopathy; physical therapy. 

MASTITIS, inflammation of the 
breast; it occurs in various forms 
and degrees of severity. An injury 
to the mammary glands can produce 
an infection by staphylococci or strep¬ 
tococci. The breast becomes swollen, 
reddened, knotty, and tender to the 
touch. Pain may be severe and fever 
high. 

The acute form, puerperal (pertain¬ 
ing to childbirth) mastitis, is frequent 
among nursing mothers, occurring a 
few days or weeks after delivery. A 
so-called ‘^caked breast,’’ the result 
of excessive milk secretion with re¬ 
tention, may precede it. In some 
instances, chronic mastitis follows the 
acute form. However, it may be the 
outgrowth of an injury to the tissues 
of the breast or due to menstrual dis- 


502 



MASTOID 


MEASLES 


oidL\s. miscarriage, a/'orfi 

Women tiunnj oienopaii'-e are tre- 
qiieiitly affected* ^"ouiic girls niai 
seller a paintui swelling and haiden» 
log of the breast during pjhert}. 
Mastitis at p'ubert\ is rarely a serious 
iiiflammation and in most ca>-es 
quickly siihsides. 

Mastitis must always he diagnosed 
and. treated by a physician. Treat¬ 
ment may involve siirgicaf emptying 
of abscesses and extraction of milk 
mitli a pump. Drugs, such as the 
sulfonamides and antibiotics, are pre¬ 
scribed to act specifically against the 
germs. See also bre\st, 

MASTOID. The mastoid (breast¬ 
shaped) bone is a part of the skuii 
Just behind the ear. This spongy net¬ 
work of bone connects with the 
middle ear. Disorders of the middle 
ear^ nose, throat, or upper part oi 
the breathing system may cause infec¬ 
tion to spread into the mastoid. When 
this occurs with inflanimation of the 
bone, the condition, mastoiditis, is 
dangerous, not only because it may 
cause permanefit damage to the inner 
ear but because the close proximity 
of the mastoid tissues to the brain 
may lead to meningitis, the spread of 
infection into the membranes around 
the brain. 

Symptoms of mastoid infection in¬ 
clude high temperature, pain, and 
redness behind the ear, and occasion¬ 
ally a stiff neck. Often earache, sore 
throat, or a cold have preceded the 
symptoms^ Infection of the mastoid 
may follow measles, scarlet fever, or 
diphtheria. 

Prompt treatment of infections of 


the thecal. tcn-I ‘evd e:ii 

has n\ule Tias\"*n'd intec- 
tioTiN rare: twenty jers ago the con¬ 
dition was common. Treumetri 
se\ere mastoid infection meo' include 
surgery in which the di-Ct^ed inner 
contents of the hone 

reraosed. 

^lEASLES, an acute, liighb coni- 
municabie disease, cimimoii through¬ 
out the world. The characieiistic 
s^^mptoms resemble those of the com- 
moo cold with fe\er and the cari> 
appearance of a rash oo the inacoos 
membranes of Ihe cheeks and lips and 
later over the entire body. The dis¬ 
ease is found cvenwiiere, regardless 
of climate, race, social or economic 
status. Epidemics usually occur in 
late winter, at tw^o-year intervals io 
large communities and four- to five- 
year intervals in smaller comiiiunilies. 
Everyone is susceptible to measles 
and the transmission, of the disease 
takes only an infinitesimal dose of 
the virus. Most of the cases occur 
among children, adults usually having 
had it in childhood. However, older 
people have been known to contract 
measles in areas where an epidemic 
appears after a long absence. Measles 
during pregnancy is apt to cause 
miscarriage; it has been observ^ed in 
newborn infants when the mother 
has had it simultaneously. 

Measles is transmitted through 
secretions from the eyes, nose, and 
throat by direct contact or droplet 
infection and is spread through the 
air by coughing, sneezing, or talk¬ 
ing. It may be transmitted from seven 
to eleven days after a person has con- 


503 



MEASLES 


MEASLES 


traded it. Transmission is at its 
highest peak just before the rash 
appears. Complications that may fol¬ 
low measles do not spread the disease, 
though they may transmit the second¬ 
ary infection. 

The first sjTnptoms generally re¬ 
semble a cold, with running nose, 
sneezing, an irregular fever and chills, 
pains in the head and back, and 
watering eyes. There may also be in¬ 
flammation of the upper respiratory 
passages and congestion of the 
mucous membranes of the nose and 
mouth. A day or two later, bluish 
white specks, called Koplik’s spots, 
appear opposite the first molar teeth 
and inside the lower lip. They are 
pinpoint in size and surrounded by a 
bright red area. At first there are only 
a few, but soon the spots increase 
and run together. Koplik’s spots may 
be seen two or three days before the 
rash appears. As soon as these spots 
appear, the person should be isolated, 
not only to avoid spreading the dis¬ 
ease but also to aid his own recovery. 
Fever will be fairly steady, gradually 
rising to its height when the rash 
appears. 

The rash, which usually appears 
over the body about fourteen days 
after exposure and about three or 
four days after the fever begins, 
seldom lasts longer than four or five 
days. It first appears in the hairline, 
behind the ears, on the neck and 
over the forehead, then extends 
downward, gradually covering the 
entire body. These tiny red pimples 
become larger and redder and tend 
to increase and group together, giving 
the skin a blotchy appearance. Tem¬ 


perature often ranges between 104° 
to 105°, the skin itches and burns, 
the face is puffy, the eyes red and 
swollen and sensitive to strong light. 
A discharge from the nose ensues, 
as well as a hoarse cough without 
discharge, and the patient generally 
feels miserable. When the r^h has 
reached its peak, the fever drops 
rapidly, the symptoms disappear, the 
cough lessens, and the patient begins 
to improve rapidly. As the rash fades 
and dries, the skin sheds gritty brown¬ 
ish scales. 

Uncomplicated measles is not a 
particularly severe disease, but, like 
many of the virus infections, it tends 
to reduce the normal resistance of 
the body so that the patient becomes 
susceptible to secondary infections, 
which may involve the upper respira¬ 
tory tract, the ears, nose, sinuses, 
larynx, and lungs. The most serious 
complication is bronchopneumonia 
or conjunctivitis which may damage 
the eyes. At one time tuberculosis 
was a frequent aftermath of measles, 
particularly in cases in which pro¬ 
longed signs of lung involvement and 
persistent low-grade fever were pres¬ 
ent. In addition to these secondary 
invasions by bacteria, another serious 
complication due to the virus of 
measles itself is inflammation of the 
brain or encephalitis. Fortunately 
this is rare. 

In recent years, use of convalescent 
serum in prevention and treatment of 
measles has modified the severity of 
the disease and in some cases averted 
it successfully. Immune ^obulin, ex¬ 
tracted from normal human placental 
tissue, and gamma globulin, a sub- 


504 



MEAT, ANIMAL MEAT, ANIMAL 

stance taken from pooled blood col- aspirin may he gi’s.cn. A‘J acti^jt} 
lected by blood banks, have all proved must be restricted and the period ol 

effective in weakening the virulence convalescence proloaced until ful 

of the disease. strength is regained. As an added pre^ 

Of utmost consideration are ai! caution, persons caring for th» 
measures which will prevent develop- patient should wear an outer garmcn' 
ment or spread of measles. Children which can be removed before cou' 

who have been exposed to it should tact with other people, and hand' 

be isolated for fourteen days after should be scrubbed on leaving the 

their first known contact. If globulin sickroom. Wlten the disease has sub- 

has been given to modify the disease, sided, the patient’s dishes, linens, hed- 
the child should be isolated for a ding, and the entire room should bt 

minimum of eighteen days following disinfected. See al%o isrrx riofs Dis- 


me last exposure* uoiiecessarv ex- 

r Acce 
























F: 11 iW 













suited promptly for preventive treat- nificantly depend on cuts or on differ- 













kept normal, and his eyes protected well-balanced diet. Besides being a 
against strong glaring lights. Drugs good source of carbohydrate, meat 




505 





MEAT, AMIMAL 


MEAT, ANIMAL 


hie acijuncl In o\ercomiiig natritionai 
anemia. Particularly significant is the 
protein winch meat supplies. Meat, 
composed almost entirely of animal 
protein, is one of the best and most 
complete sources of protein, wMch is 
essential lo maintain body tissue and 
to promote growth. High-protein 
diets are often prescribed after burns, 
surgical operations, and mfectious 
diseases. 

Afost meat to be sold commercially 
is inspected by the federal govern¬ 
ment and stamped U.S. Insp’d. The 
meat packer usually grades the meat, 
with the rating enclosed in a shield. 
The grades commonly purchased are 
prime, choice, good, standard, and 
commercial, in order of the quality 
of the grade, prime being the most 
select, and commercial the lowest 
grade. Following is a list of calories 
per pound of meat. 

BEEF —all edible portions 


Chuck 

1005 

Loin., Porterhouse steak 

1270 

Loin, Sirloin steak 

1130 

Round steak 

835 

Rump 

1325 

VEAL 

Breast 

840 

Chuck 

610 

Legs, cutlets 

705 

LAMB 

Breast or chuck 

1350 

Loin 

1540 

PORK 

Ribs and Shoulder, 

chuck 

1635 

Flank 

1280 


Ham, fresh 

1700 

Loin, chops 

1655 

POULTRY 

Chicken, broilers 

205 

Fowl, as purchased 

775 

Goose, young, as 

purchased 

1505 

Turkey, as purchased 

1505 

Chicken, gizzard 

1075 


APPROXIMATE PROTEINS 


PER POUND 
BEEF, Fresh 


Chuck, edible portion 
Loin, Porterhouse steak. 

19.2% 

edible portion 

21.9% 

Loin, Sirloin steak, 


edible portion 

18.9% 

Round steak. 


edible portion 

20.9% 

VEAL, Fresh 


Breast, edible portion 

20.3% 

Cutlets, " " 

20.3% 

Chuck, " " 

19.7% 

LAMB, Fresh 


Breast, edible portion 

19.1% 

Loin, " " 

18.7% 

PORK 


Ribs and Shoulder, 


edible portion 

17.3% 

Ham, fresh. 


edible portion 

19.5% 

Loin chops, 


edible portion 

16.4% 

Flank, edible portion 

18.3% 


POULTRY AND GAME 

Chicken broilers, 

edible portion 25,1% 


506 



MEATUS 


MEDICINE CHEST 


Foml, as purchased i3.7Cc 

Turkey, as purchased 16.1^ 

CMckea, gizzards 24.7 Sr 

^lEAlUS, aa opening or passage. 
The term is applied to various orifices 
or openings of the body, such as the 
auditory or external ear, the meatus 
of the nose which connects the 
pharynx and the nasal passage, and 
the urethral meatus through which 
urine is discharged. 

MEDICINE CHEST. Every house¬ 
hold should have an orderly, ade¬ 
quately stocked medicine chest~that 
is, a cabinet or container in which 
medicines, drags, bandages, and 
other related supplies are kept. Too 
often the family medicine chest is a 
catchall, and the medicines and drugs 
it does contain are old or unlabeled 
or their original purpose forgotten. 
Drugs wrongly used can do infinite 
harm, and all old medicines for ill¬ 
nesses since cured should be thrown 
out. Not only can random taking of 
medicine be harmful, but many drugs 
deteriorate and are not safe after a 
certaiii time. Every item in the medi¬ 
cine chest should be labeled and, if 
necessary, dated. It may be a wise 
idea to keep the cabinet or container 
locked if there are children in the 
household, since even a seemingly 
mild medicine can have fatal results. 
The key should be kept in a safe 
place where it can be found promptly. 
Folowing are items which most fami- 
ies will want to keep in their medi¬ 
cine cabinets. 

Laxatives and cathartics, A wide 
variety of substances are used as 
laxatives. Castor oE and epsom salts 


are not generaily advisable, since 
they are irritants and may drasiicall\ 
disrupt the norma! pattern of bo^e! 
mosement. Mineral oik a mcchaoical 
lubricant, is somev^hat less potent; 
horn ever, if used over a period of 
time, it may interfere with the ab¬ 
sorption of vitamins A and D. Per¬ 
haps the safest laxatives are the so- 
called bulk laxatives. Some persons, 
however, are sensitive to the natural 
type, and synthetic bulk producers 
are more consistent in their action, 
nonallergenic. and do not swell until 
they reach the inlestioe. Other com¬ 
mon popular preparations include 
phenolphthalein, Seidiitz powder, so¬ 
dium phosphate, milk of magnesia, 
aromatic cascara, and minerai oils 
mixed with sugars. A laxative or ca¬ 
thartic should never be taken w^hen 
the abdomen is painful, since it may 
cause serious harm—for example, in 
the case of appendicitis. Persistent 
use of laxatives will eventually 
chronically interfere with the normal 
bowel movements, and is a habit to 
be avoided. 

Pain relievers. Most pain relievers 
are used for headache, although they 
are sometimes taken for neuritis, 
neuralgia, toothache, colds, and paim 
of unknown origin. Most headache 
powders purchased commercially 
contain phenacetin or acetanilid in 
varying doses. The most common 
general pain reliever is acetylsali- 
cylic acid, commonly called aspirin, 
which is usually sold in S-grain tab¬ 
lets. If kept in a tightly-capped bottle, 
aspirin will keep indefinitely, except 
in the tropics. Aspirin does not cure, 
but will relieve certain types of pain. 


507 




MEDICINE CHEST 


MEDiONE CHEST 


It acth as hoik an antipyretic (anti- 
tc\erl drdg, and an analgesic (anti- 
raial drug. Various combinations of 
tispino are available^—^for example, 
wife pbenacetin and caffein. Al- 
thoiigli It is one of the safest drugs, 
serious and even fata! effects from as- 
piria poisoning point up that no drug 
IS alm^ays safe. 

Aspirin is available for children in 
smaller tablets, which are sometimes 
f1a\ored. This has proved to be a 
mixed Messing, since children may 
confuse the aspirin with candy and 
consume large quantities of it. An 
editorial in the Journal of the Ameri¬ 
can Medical Association has advised 
against the use of sweetened aspirin 
and aspirin chewing gum. Hundreds 
of cases of aspirin poisoning occur 
each year and usually because 
through negligence the bottle of as¬ 
pirin has been left in a place accessi¬ 
ble to children. 

Most cases of aspirin sensitivity 
are not serious, but two or three per¬ 
sons out of a hundred have reactions, 
usually nausea or stomach upset. 
This is especially likely in those who 
have alergies or asthmatic condi¬ 
tions, and such persons should be 
especiaEy cautious in using aspirin. 

Sleep-producing drugs. Most of 
the sleep-producing drugs are chiefly 
derivatives of barbituric acid—^for 
example, Seconal, Amytal, veronal, 
Trional, and combinations of bar¬ 
bituric acid with other drugs. These 
drugs should be used only under 
medical care, and then extreme cau¬ 
tion should be taken to keep them 
out of the reach of children, and to 
have the bottle clearly identified. 


Narcotics. Among the strongest of 
medicinai preparations are the nar¬ 
cotics and anesthetics, which should 
never be used by anyone without a 
doctor’s prescription. A drug that 
most be administered with a hypo¬ 
dermic syringe should not be kept 
in the family medicine cabinet. Some 
persons with diabetes have been 
taught by their doctor to inject them¬ 
selves with insulin, and they usually 
keep the syringe outfit in a special 
separate place. 

Antibiotics. Formerly antibiotics 
could be obtained only by prescrip¬ 
tion, but now, in some states and in 
certain dosages, they can be pur¬ 
chased at a drug store without a 
prescription. Antibiotic lozenges for 
mouth infections or sore throats, and 
bandages medicated with antibiotics 
are now available. 

Any antibiotic preparation should 
be used with discretion. Locally they 
can produce definite sensitizing ef¬ 
fects and result in irritations far more 
serious than the one the drag was 
purchased to cure. Also, taken orally, 
antibiotics, such as Aureomycin, Ter- 
ramycin, penicillin, are known at 
times to produce serious side effects. 
Any antibiotics that are left over 
from a prescription should be de¬ 
stroyed; and If, for any reason, old 
antibiotic preparations are taken and 
signs of nausea, vomiting, or other 
unusual symptoms appear, the doctor 
should be contacted at once. 

Antiseptics. Many different anti¬ 
septics are available for use on the 
skin, for cleansing parts of the body, 
or as a gargle. Iodine, Metaphen, 


508 



MELANCHOLIA 


MELANOSIS 


Merciirocliroin.e, Zephiran, and simi¬ 
lar preparations are often used. 

First aid. Among the materials 
needed for first aid are adhesive tape 
of various widths, sterile cotton, ster¬ 
ile gauze bandages, sterile gauze 
pads, petroleum Jelly, zinc oxide oint¬ 
ment, and scissors, wMch should be 
kept in the medicine chest exclusively 


electric pad, ice has, ard sotnciime^ 
a special device for crcatii!^? steim, to 
be medicated mith small amounts ai 
tincture of benzoin or other drugs 
for relief in various types of throat 
conditions. 

The family medicine cabinet 
should be checked at least fear times 


a jear, and all unnecessary 



and convenient to have a bedpan. 


tlONXL MELANCHOLIA. 


an eneiBa, atomi^r, hot-water bottle, exists when abnomial deposits of 








MELANURiA 


MEMORY 


melanin are formed in the blood or 
placed in organs or surfaces. Mela- 
nins are metabolic, dark brownish, 
granular pigments which are pro¬ 
duced by the activity of cells. As a 
normal pigmentary matter, melanins 
occur in hair, skin, or muscles. Pig¬ 
mentation of the skin or some in¬ 
ternal organs is not always associated 
with a medical disorder. Tanning or 
freckling result from exposure of the 
skin to the ultraviolet rays of the 
sun, or from radium therapy. Pro¬ 
longed treatment with certain chemi¬ 
cals—such as arsenic, for example— 
will also result in skin pigmentation. 
The nipples of the breast and other 
parts of the body may be pigmented 
during pregnancy. 

Melanosis, however, is sometimes 
related to serious ailments. In Addi¬ 
son’s disease, some skin disorders, 
and ochronosis, a discoloration of 
cartilage and allied tissues, melanosis 
is a symptom. It also occurs in pel¬ 
lagra and other disorders resulting 
from vitamin deficiencies. 

Tumors containing melanins, the 
so-called malignant melanomas or 
melanocancers are especially serious. 
They originate in discolored flat¬ 
tened moles and spread, adding pig¬ 
mentation to other parts of the body. 
In such cases, melanuria is pro¬ 
nounced. Since pigments may be in¬ 
volved in all sorts of tissues, the pre¬ 
fix “melano” may also refer to the 
pigment in sweat (melanidrosis), to 
the pigment in the menstrual flow 
(melamorrhagia), to the pigments in 
the mucous membranes of the 
mouth (melanoplakia), and to the 
black fungus growths (melano- 


myces). See also freckles; sun¬ 
burn. 

MELANURIA, the condition in 
which urine takes on a brownish 
black color because large quantities 
of pigments are present. 

MEMORY, the capacity to retain 
and revive impressions, to recall or 
recognize previous experience. Some 
recollections seem to appear without 
any exertion on the part of the per¬ 
son, whereas sometimes a recollec¬ 
tion will entail a certain amount of 
mental activity. It is probably true 
that every experience and impression 
is permanently recorded in some way 
on the brain; however, intervening 
happenings and thoughts “block” or 
cover the great majority of impres¬ 
sions, which, from a practical point 
of view, are “forgotten.” Forgotten 
impressions are sometimes recalled 
in specialized circumstances, such as 
imder hypnosis. 

Very little is known about the way 
in which memory operates. Some in¬ 
formation has come from experi¬ 
ments on the brain. For instance, per¬ 
sons who have tumors of the frontal 
lobes of the brain suffer some loss 
of memory, particularly of recent 
events. Hardening of the arteries and 
diminished circulation of the blood 
associated with old age also have an 
influence on memory. 

Memory is sometimes spoken of 
as “good” or “bad.” The amount and 
accuracy vrith which a person can re¬ 
member is usually a matter of his 
degree of concentration. A person 
preoccupied with his own introspec¬ 
tive thoughts rather than with what 


510 



MEMIERE^S DISEASE 


MEMIMGES 


IS happeoiiig around him mil! oftea 
have a '‘bad’* memory. See also am¬ 
nesia. 

.\IENIERE’^S DISEASE, a chroaic 
ailment in which the major symp¬ 
toms are dizziness, deafness, and 
noises in one or both ears. It is iisn- 
aliy due to an interference with the 
function of the iimer ear or laby¬ 
rinth, and is frequently accompanied 
by nausea and vomiting. It begins 
in late life and affects both sexes. 
This group of symptoms is often 
called aural vertigo or Meniere’s 
syndrome, since it was first noted in 
1861 by the French physician, Pros¬ 
per Meniere. 

The disease begins with mild deaf¬ 
ness and head noises, called tinnitus, 
which are high-pitched and hissing, 
roaring, or ringing. The noises are 
generally heard on one side of the 
head only, and vary in intensity from 
day to day. The vertigo, which is a 
strong feeling of swaying, rocking, or 
turning, begins abruptly, and may 
last from a few minutes to several 
hours, and is generally associated 
with nausea and vomiting. It recurs 
at long, irregular intervals. Com¬ 
plete rest helps to lessen the severity 
of the attacla. Impairment of hear¬ 
ing is progressive, and on rare occa¬ 
sions, during an acute attack of dizzi¬ 
ness, there may be a rolling of the 
eyes from side to side, known as 
nystagmus. 

Treatment of this condition is stiff 
experimental. It includes a low-salt 
diet and daily doses of ammonium 
cMoride. AntMstaminic drags, 
Dramamine, Marezine, and Bona- 


min.c, are now being used with fairly 
good results. The course of the dis¬ 
ease varies with each patient. There 
ba\e been long periods of relief m 

many cases. 

As in many disorders which recur 
periodically, emphasis in trcatuieci 
is placed upon gning the patient a 
feeling of complete reassurance and 
confidence; and this, together with 
well-regulated living, sufficient rest, 
and moderate sedatives such as 
phenobarbital, frequently bring about 
noticeable improvement. Psycho¬ 
therapy is recommended when ex¬ 
treme emotional tension is present. 

When the attacks are persistent and 
do not yield to treatment, surgery is 
employed. The eighth cranial nen’e, 
which supplies the branches to the 
ear, is cut. In those instances where 
hearing is present on only one side, 
especially if deafness has already be¬ 
gun in the opposite ear, the neiv^e is 
not completely cut, so that as much 
hearing as possible may remain. This 
operation has helped relieve the pa¬ 
tient of vertigo in almost all cases, 
except, of course, those in which it 
originally started on both sides. 

MENMGliraf the three membranes 
which cover the brain and spinal 
cord. They include the pia mater, 
which contacts the cord and the 
brain substance; the dura mater, 
which lines the spinal canal and the 
cranial cavity; and the arachnoid, a 
substance resembling a fine web 
which is between the pia mater and 
the dura mater. 

Meningitis is an inflammation of 

511 



MENiNGITiS 


MENOPAUSE 


these meninges. The prefix “mening” 
generally denotes disorders that af¬ 
fect the membranes, such as menin¬ 
gioma, a tumor in the meninges, or 
meningism, an irritation of the menin¬ 
ges. See also meningitis. 

MENINGITIS, an inflammation of 
the meninges, the membranes cover¬ 
ing the brain and spinal cord, caused 
by infection of the cerebrospinal fluid 
by various microorganisms. The term 
is, however, usually applied to an 
epidemic form, caused by the menin¬ 
gococcus. 

The doctor diagnoses meningitis 
not only from the history of the pa¬ 
tient, which may indicate that he 
has been in contact with the infec¬ 
tion, and from the symptoms, but 
also by obtaining specimens of the 
spinal fluid which are studied for the 
presence of germs and for other 
changes which indicate infection and 
inflammation. Occasionally examina¬ 
tions are made of the blood to find 
out whether or not there is a menin- 
gococcemia, which means germs of 
meningitis in the blood. 

The symptoms of meningitis arise 
from the changes that the germs and 
their poisons produce in the tissues 
of the nervous system. During the 
period of invasion, sore throat, dull¬ 
ness, fever, chills, rapid pulse, and a 
general soreness of the body indicate 
that an infection is present. Then a 
rash of pinpoint-sized red spots or 
even large spots appears over the 
body. In the stage when the infec¬ 
tion has spread to the nervous sys¬ 
tem, severe pain is felt, with intolera¬ 
ble headaches, vomiting, and even 
delirium and convulsions. 


The conquest of meningitis is one 
of the great triumphs of medicine. 
Before the discovery of a serum 
which could be used against menin¬ 
gitis, the death rate used to be 80 or 
90 out of every 100 cases. Sulfa 
drugs, antibiotics, and other advances 
in treatment have reversed the situ¬ 
ation so that today recovery is the 
rule and death the exception, even in 
the most stubborn form of the dis¬ 
ease, tuberculous meningitis, a variety 
caused by the tuberculosis germ. 
Medicine may well be within sight 
of a meningitis recovery rate of 100 
per cent. Because of the many pos¬ 
sible complications, hospital care is 
necessary for persons with meningitis. 
See also cerebral meningitis. 

MENOPAUSE, or, more popularly, 
change of life, the characteristic phys¬ 
ical changes which most women 
undergo between the ages of forty- 
five and fifty, though sometimes ear¬ 
lier or later. Early onset of men¬ 
struation is usually associated with 
late appearance of the change of life. 

The basis of the retrogression is 
the gradual cessation of the secre¬ 
tion of certain major endocrine 
glands. The most noticeable aspect 
is the gradual or abrupt disappear¬ 
ance of menstruation. Loss of sexual 
desire and sexual activity are rarely 
involved. Not only do the ovaries, 
the female sex glands, become rela¬ 
tively inactive, but other changes take 
place in the body. The spleen, the 
lymphatic system, and the intestines 
are affected, at least slightly. 

The manner in which the changes 
of menopause take place is subject to 
tremendous variation among women. 


512 



MEMOiRHAGIA 


MEHSIiyATION 


With some it occurs quickly and with 
only minor disturbances. With others, 
however, the change of life lasts 
three or four years, accompanied by 
much difficulty. The most trouble¬ 
some factors sometimes associated 
with the menopause are mental de¬ 
pression, heightened irritability, and 
excitability. Unless these are extreme, 
however, little medical treatment is 
necessary. Nevertheless, mental diffi¬ 
culties may develop at this time and 
then medical advice is desirable. 

The most common physical symp¬ 
tom is the hot flush, which sweeps 
the entire body with sudden warmth 
and perspiration, then leaves it chilly. 
Flushes occur without perceptible 
reason or often in association with 
excitement. Itching skin and consti¬ 
pation of the bowels may be noticed 
but are readily controlled, and heart 
palpitations, headache, dizziness, and 
insomnia are not unusual. 

Most of the unpleasant develop¬ 
ments of menopause are of minor 
consequence, and these, and others 
of a more serious nature, can usually 
be controlled with hormones. Be¬ 
cause of the complications which 
may be involved and the long dura¬ 
tion of change, medical supervision 
is helpM. The same symptoms may 
characterize other developments 
within the body and demand prompt 
medical attention when they occur. 
Men often experience many of the 
unpleasant symptoms of menopause, 
related to retrogression of the sex 
glands. See also mensteuation. 

BfENOEKHAGIA, the loss of an 
exceptional amount of blood at the 
monthly menstrual periods, in con¬ 


trast to metrorrbagia m i\b!ch an cx- 
cessi\e flow of blood occurs between 
menstrual penods Seseral pcssiMe 
causes has e been found for this uter¬ 
ine bleeding, including poor func¬ 
tioning of hormones m\oKed in the 
menstrual cycle, poor blood clotting, 
an unusual condition of the blood, 
or some emoticna! or psychological 
factor. 

A physician must be consulted to 
diagnose the cause. Among successful 
therapeutic measures employed are 
complete bed rest and drugs to relieve 
anxiety and to bring about contrac¬ 
tions of the womb. Hormones, such 
as estrogen, progesterone, and andro¬ 
gen, have also been used successfully. 

MESrSTRUATION, the periodic 
flow of blood experienced by women 
in the years of sexual maturity and 
the associated changes that occur in 
the body at this time. 

When the discharge ceases, the 
lining of the uterus or womb begins 
to thicken and continues the process 
for a week or longer. In the next 
stage, lasting about two weeks, the 
lining of tfae^ womb becomes en¬ 
gorged, in readiness to receive a ferti¬ 
lized egg. 'Approximately two weeks 
before tiie regular menstrual flow be¬ 
gins the ovary releases an egg. If the 
egg is not fertilized and pregnancy 
has not taken place, by the end of 
the cycle the womb lining, called 
the endometrium, breaks down, al¬ 
terations in the Mood vessels occur, 
and the menstiiial flow washes away 
the residue. 

Characteristics peculiar to this 
cycle vary greatly in different women. 
Although the average period is ex- 

SIS 



MENSTRUATiON 


MENSTRUATION 


actly four weeks or 28 days, some 
women complete the cycle in three 
weeks and some take as long as 
i¥e. In others, irregularity may be 
usual* Although the age of sexual ma¬ 
turity is usually between the twelfth 
and the skteenth years, development 
earlier or later is not abnormal. 

Slight variations in the individual 
cycle are not significant, but sudden 
major changes, such as complete 
cessation of menstruation in the ab¬ 
sence of pregnancy, should receive 
prompt medical attention. Suspension 
of the menstrual period may be 
caused by a variety of factors. Under¬ 
nourishment and associated disturb¬ 
ances such as anemia, or severe in¬ 
fections like tuberculosis, rheumatic 


or typhoid fever may be responsible. 
Disorders of the pituitary gland or 
thyroid gland or the ovaries them¬ 
selves may be involved. Two ovarian 
secretions or hormones, estradiol 
and progesterone, are the chief regu¬ 
lators of the menstrual cycle, and the 
ovaries in turn are controlled to some 
extent by the pituitary. 

Conspicuous delay in the onset of 
menstruation in a young woman 
should be investigated by a physician. 
Although nothing more serious than 
personal variation may be involved, 
other difficulties may be responsible. 
Delayed development, if it persists, 
may eventually lead to psychological 
changes, rendering normal childbirth 
impossible. 


A. THE ORGANS INVOLVED 

^OVUM 
Eqq wliicfi 



FOlliCLE 
Bladder lull of 
iiquIcS wfiich 
swells and byrsfs, 
woshtng eg § owt. 


OVARIES ^ 
Alfernaie in 
producing 
egg each month. 


CORPUS LUTEUM 
Gland formed in 
burst follicle. Promotes | 
growth of uterus linirtg. 


* TUBES 

Catch egg and transport 
if to wferus. Meeting 
plooe for sperm and egg. 



UTERUS 
Nourishes 
fertilized egg in 
its lining. Expels 
lining monthly 
(menstruation) 
if egg is not 
fertilized. 


VAGINA 
Passage where 
sperm is 
deposited to 
fertilize egg. 


^mtruation-The accompanying charts illustrate the mfenstrual cycle. Shown are the organs 
involved (A), the monthly cycle (BJ, and the process of conception (Q. The first doy of the 

wenslfwol period Is the first day of the cycle. 


514 



B.WHAT HAPPENS DURING REGULAR MONTHLY CYCLE 


BEGINNING ^ 

Egg appears in 
follicle—which 
grows for 
about 2 weeks. 


^"felLICLE 


OVULATION ^ 

Follicle bursts 
15 days before 
onset of next 
menstrual 
period. Egg 
swept into 
tube, posses 
through in 4 
days. 


OVARY 


CORPUS LUTEUM 





1 

BR'EF DEVELC 
Corpus 


cosses stead i 


m^hii 
GRAT’CN 
Corpus iutf^un- 
disin^cgra'^es 
as does 
liRing. 

•^-tailing 
m4. egg 






EvyV n )ay 6 f^ menstrual peIiod I 

[Tl^3i4t'Sl 6|7 8|9 10jnjl2|l3|l415|l6|l718 19|202lj22j23|24.25|26!2^^^^^ 2 

C WHAT HAPPENS WHEN CONCEPT ON TAliCES PLACE 

f I t I I I I I i f I t t I 1 > I I I I i t I I UW I 1 I I 




FOLLICLE 


' • ‘ i 11 M 1 -.! ^ t 
Ml ¥\/ i'M/1 


FERTILIZATION 

Sperm cell unites with egg in tube. 
Must occur during Rrst 48 hours 
after egg emerges from follicle, 


DEVELOPMENT & IMPLANTATjON 
Fertilized egg plants itself in thejiiii.^i 
of the uterus. Corpus 
ing continue to 
















MENTAL DEPRESSION 


MENTAL DEPRESSION 


Men^truai pain ma} be cau'-ed by 
such factors as a narrow ceniK, the 
pa^vapevwiy from the momb, by fi¬ 
broid turners in the uterus, by cysts, 
or b\ \driaticn'i in the position ot the 
'Uterus, Most of these conditions can 
rerriOdied hy a ph\sician. Pain and 
disccmlort which somefimes accom¬ 
pany menstroation may often be re¬ 
lieved by ^imple measures such as 
mild sedatives, application of heat, 
and plenty of rest and sleep. Never¬ 
theless, a phvsician should be con¬ 
sulted if these remedies are not ef¬ 
fective. Glandular substances, to 
modify the behavior of the mechan¬ 
isms invohed, or the use of more 
potent pain-relieving drugs may be 
necessary. Some drugs are harmful 
if not employed under medical super¬ 
vision and milder ones may become 
habit-forming if care is not exercised. 

Menstruation is a normal physio¬ 
logical function, and is not con¬ 
cerned, as some suppose, with ridding 
the body of ‘'"poisons.” Unless special 
factors are involved that prompt 
medical advice to the contrary, 
young women need vary only slightly 
their ordinary routines. Violent and 
competitive athletics are not advisa¬ 
ble or should be closely controlled 
because of the general stress they 
'impose m the body, and bathing 
need not be interrupted. Swimming 
may cause extra blood to be lost, 
but there is rarely any risk of in¬ 
fection from the water itself. See 
also dysmenorehea; menorrhagia; 

MENOPAUSE; METRORRHAGIA. 
MENTAL DEPRESSION, a quality 


stute ot emotional dejection and 
^airies>, usually accompanied by a 
dLk,rea>e in activity. Depression in 
person IS reflected io his attitudes 
hn\ard other people and their ac- 
t.ons Depression is a state of mind 
ill which initiative and decision are 
parafvzed. When people are de¬ 
pressed thev grow too careful. They 
te^if to spend money; they fear to 
eojov pleasures and amusements; 
thc\ hesitate to meet other people. 
E^eniualh the person who is de¬ 
pressed becomes on bad terms not 
onK with the world in general but 
also with himself. Under these cir¬ 
cumstances he thinks too much 
about himself, both physically and 
mentally. He tends to live in the 
past and to evade the future. Quite 
soon his depression reflects itself in 
his personal appearance. He permits 
his clothing to go without suitable 
attention; he neglects to shave if he 
IS a man or to tend to her cosmetic 
appearance and her hair if a woman. 
For this reason people who are de¬ 
pressed tend to resemble one an¬ 
other in several ways. 

During a period of depression a 
man is likely to change his former 
judgments of other people. Those 
w^hom he formerly liked he now finds 
unbearable; he may actually begin 
to seek out those whom he formerly 
hated. His depression makes him 
irritable so that he is rude and hyper¬ 
critical. 

One of the most important steps 
in overcoming depression is for the 
person to understand his condition. 
This at least will serve to prevent 


516 



MENTAL DISEASES AND DISORDERS 


METASTASIS 


constant worr> and afi\iet\. People 
who insist that they never worry 
ha\e learned to reason themselves, 
b\ rationalization, out of anxiet\ 
over Situations in which the} find 
themselves. Other people develop 
mental tranquility or peace of mind 
by accepting some belief which elim¬ 
inates from consideration anything 
that is displeasing. This is not ration¬ 
alization but may bring about the 
same effect for a person who is 
capable of shutting out from his 
thoughts any problem that disturbs 
him. Peace of mind is necessary for 
accomplishment because absence of 
peace of mind gives a constant feel¬ 
ing of insecurity. Often mental de¬ 
pression is transferred to physical 
symptoms, so that worry may cause 
a person to have palpitations of the 
heart or to feel extra beats. If the 
nervous condition brings the focus 
of attention on the stomach and 
bowels, such symptoms as constipa¬ 
tion and diarrhea may occur. 

Failure to practice good mental 
hygiene may lead eventually to an 
attempt to escape from mental dis¬ 
turbance by the use of drinks, drugs, 
sedatives, or gambling, which in 
themselves may be worse than the 
worry that they replace. A restful 
night's sleep, a vacation, outdoor 
sports, or even frequent use of the 
radio and the movies are better ways 
of escape from worry. 

People who are depressed have 
been treated with several drugs pop¬ 
ularly called psychic energizers such 
as Nardil, Catron, etc. If the central 
nervous system is underactive, these 


uiugv ma\ it fo a nv.vv 

normal o* 

drugs of mis t\pe are not gisen tc' 
people who are o\erc\citcd It iWLst 
be renienibereu that rcliei aifordeJ 
by drugs to alleviate depre^'^ion s 
only tempo!ary since the roots of 
the condition have not been cureo 
See ii/w; vwitn; 

f-im. STRESS. 

.\IENTAL DISEASES AM> DIS¬ 
ORDERS. Set 4M\FSI4: \PH\MV 
delusions; ELLCFRIC SHOIK 
mfm; fleble-mindi dm ss. i\\ 

LUTiON\L MEl iNCHOl lU, MWIC-DI- 
PRESSIVE PSVCHOSIS; Mt\14l 1)1- 

pression; NEi Rosis; p 4R wcius; 
PSRtSIS; psychosis: schi/opiiri m\ 

METABOLISM* See basal metabo¬ 
lism. 

METASTxASIS, a process in wWch 
primary agents or cells, through, 
blood vessels or lymph channels, 
transfer the seat of a disease from one 
part of the body to another. For 
example, tumors of one organ may 
spread to the brain, especially from 
a focus in the lungs and breasts. Can¬ 
cer in any part of the body may 
metastasize—^that is, transfer— from 
the kidney, uterus, prostate, or breast 
and become secondary cancer in 
another part of the body. The condi¬ 
tion is dangerous since it can be¬ 
come widespread before any symp¬ 
toms are apparent. 

Another example of metastasis is 
the wandering course of acute rheu¬ 
matism, which has the tendency to 
involve the lining of the heart and 
the pericardium, the membranous sac 


5i7 




METfCORTEN 


MIGRAINE 


which it envelops. In mumps, the 
tc-ticlcs ot males or ovaries of fe- 
makw nid} be inuil’.ed, as a result of 

metastasis 

^lETICCIElEN. See cort!SOnf. 

METWTIS* Iq medicine, diseases oi 
the uterus are referred to by the 
prefix ‘‘metro,” denoting relation to 
me womb. Metritis is an infection of 
the uterus by gonococci or other or- 
^nifiisms. A metroscope is an instru¬ 
ment used for examination of the 
uterus. 

\IETOORMHAGlA, a hemorrhage 
from the uterus between menstrual 
periods; ii may be a sign of a serious 
disorder. Full examination and treat¬ 
ment by a p!i,ysiclaii is desirable. The 
excessive flow of blood between men- 
ihlrua! periods is often related to dis¬ 
orders in the womb and pelvis, and 
sometimes to acute fevers and glan¬ 
dular conditions. See also menstrua¬ 
tion. 

MIGEALNE, commonly called “sick 
headache,” has an age-old history 
dating back, to the ancient Greeks. 
The name is believed to be derived 
from the Greek word emikrania, 
meaning half head, which became 
mikranm and eventually migraine. 
The complaint is widespread, usually 
beginning some time around puberty 
and lessening in late middle age. Mi¬ 
graine is more common in women, 
and often more than one member of 
a family suffers from it. 

Certain features distinguish mi¬ 
graine from other types of head¬ 
ache. It is limited to one side of the 
head, recurs periodically, and for 


each person follows a rather con¬ 
sistent pattern, so that it can often 
be predicted where the headache 
will begin, how severe it will be, 
and how long it will last. The head¬ 
ache is described as a throbbing, ach¬ 
ing pain, limited to the forehead, 
temple, or back of the head. In some 
cases it seems to arise from the back 
of the upper teeth and strikes the 
face and the area below the eye, or 
it may spread behind the angle of 
the jaw, reaching down the neck and 
into the shoulders. This pattern of 
pain is often accompanied by an 
unusual throbbing in the neck. In 
some instances the first symptoms 
are not confined to the head, but in¬ 
stead the person will suffer pain in 
the abdomen, chest, or arm, or an 
attack of vomiting or diarrhea, or a 
passing fever. A frequent accompani¬ 
ment to the migraine headache is a 
disturbance in vision, which may take 
the form of temporary blindness, 
blinding flashes of light, or a general 
blurring of vision. These symptoms 
disappear as the headache abates. 

Migraine, primarfly a tension head¬ 
ache, is believed to result from con¬ 
tinued muscle contraction which 
causes distention of the blood vessels 
in the brain. The general tightening 
of the body associated with anxiety 
and emotional tension contributes in 
most cases to the preliminary symp¬ 
toms—^the tingling sensations in the 
hands and feet, the impaixment of 
vision, and noises in the ears or 
mental depression. 

In the treatment of migraine, much 
emphasis is now placed on preven¬ 
tion of the attack. At the first indica- 


518 



MILK 


milK 


tlon of its approacli, steps are taken 
to avert the headache or reduce Its 
severity. Complete quiet, a dark 
mom, hot or cold applications to the 
bead and a hot-water bottle at the 
feet are often helpful. Aspirin and 
ordinary analgesics give little or no 
relief once the headache has begun. 
Histamine and intramuscular injec¬ 
tions of ergotamkie tartrate, admin¬ 
istered by a physician, ha\e been 
effective. 

The psychological factor is of pri¬ 
mary significance in treatment of mi¬ 
graine, The patient must feel that he 
is receiving the best possible care 
and that Ms physician has a thorough 
understanding of those emotional 
factors in Ms background and en¬ 
vironment which may be at the root 
of Ms condition. Patients with mi¬ 
graine headaches almost invariably 
fit into a common pattern. They are 
tense, driving, rigid in their standards, 
conscientious, and constantly striv¬ 
ing for perfection. The treatment of 
migraine must include and evaluate 
all the factors that may give rise to 
the disorder. The patient must be 
made to understand the nature of 
Ms drives and how these create frus¬ 
tration and anxiety. Psychotherapy, 
a long-term project in these cases, 
has yielded fruitful results and prom¬ 
ises to be even more successful in 
the future. 

the whitish liquid secreted 
from the mammary glands of ah 
mammals; it is the only natural food, 
intended for the very young, which 

comes straight from the living body. 
Nature provides it in abundance, and 


more than eighty dili\renl 
sources b3\e been 

Milk has alva>s been fcijihh es¬ 
teemed and from lime irnmemvra/’ 
many nourishing, healing, and 
itUiil qualities mere atlnhuted to il 
Mothers milk mas long cen^-rdereJ 
the only suitable food for an irfan: 
and children mere breast fed for 
three }cars or ioneer before amniul- 
mere domesticated and the milk of 
cows, goats, camels, and sheep able 
to be substituted for that of the 
mother. The ancients believed that 
without the milk of the mother a 
child could not possibly survive. In 
the seventeenth century, the famous 
Dutch chemist, Jean, Baptiste van 
Helmoot, proved that mother's milk 
was not essential for the cMid, and 
today many substitutes are available. 

Milk is often called a food of near 
perfection. It furnishes proteins to 
replace and repair body tissues, it 
supplies minerals such as calcium to 
build sound bones and teeth and to 
perform other functions, it is a good 
source of natural sugar and of vita¬ 
mins A, C, D, Bi, and B 2 , and it is 
abundant in fats which are more 
easily digested than any other edible 
fat. 

Chemically milk is a watery com¬ 
pound of milk sugar, casein, albumin, 
and ash, with suspended fat globules. 
When the water is removed, the dr} 
matter is milk solids. Richness ol 
milk is related to the proportion o* 
these solids. About four ounces o 
nutritional value are found in a quar 
of milk. Standards for marketed milk 
adopted in different states, vary some 


51 



MINERALS 


MONGOLISM 


.•i.'-ai bu: on the average are 12.5 per 
clhi ot whds and at least 3 per cent 
oi tJt Most mslk on the market has 
oetn pasleun/ed. Some nutritional 
e\perts ieel that pasteurization affects 
the nafntiona! qualities of milk only 
vl’g.htlv, shhile others feel that some 
ol the %itam!ns C and B complex are 
lost and minerals precipitated and 
-endeied !ess soluble. Today much of 
»he milk supply is sold in homoge¬ 
nized iorm, m\ Giving a special proc¬ 
ess in which cream is distributed 
esenlt throughout the milk. 

Dried milk is one of the forms 
now wideK used, particularly since 
It IS now asailable in a form which 
IS instantly soluble in water. By the 
method ot preparation, dried milk is 
free from danger of bacterial con¬ 
tamination. In dried milk, less than 
2 per cent of moisture remains. The 
fat, sugar, and protein of the milk 
are not chemically changed, and the 
food value is just about the same as 
that of fresh milk, except for vitamin 
C, much of which may be lost in 
the drying process. In addition to 
dried milk, dried skim milk, in which 
the hutterfat content is much less, is 
available. 

Evaporated milk is fresh mi lk from 
which the water has been evaporated 
to a point where it contains not less 
than 7.9 per cent of noilk fat and not 
less than 25.9 per cent of total milk 
solids. Condensed milk is a liquid 
made by evaporating a mixture of 
sweet milk and refined sugar or com 
sugar so that the sweetened con¬ 
densed milk contains not less than 
28 per cent of the total milk solids 


and not less than 8.5 per cent of milk 
fat. Sugar is used to prevent spoilage. 

Canned whole milk which does 
not need to be refrigerated either in 
transit or storage is the latest milk 
product to be marketed. Bacteria- 
free, the sealed milk will keep at 
least six months. When served 
chilled, it tastes much like regular 
milk and has the same food value. 

When fresh milk is not available, 
or in places where the available fresh 
milk does not meet proper sanitary 
standards, canned or dried milk is 
certainly preferable to doing with¬ 
out milk. While medical authorities 
reco mm end that the adult diet in¬ 
clude milk, it does not necessarily 
have to be consumed plain, but can 
be used in combination with other 
foods. Some persons cannot digest 
milk easily and in some cases milk 
may act as an outright toxin. In spite 
of its stronger taste, some people pre¬ 
fer goat’s milk. It is considered to be 
more easily digested, because its fat 
globules are smaller so that fiber 
curds are formed in the fibrst stages of 
digestion. See also child care; feed¬ 
ing, BREAST. 

MINERALS. See calcium; goiter; 
iron; nutrition. 

MISCARRIAGE. See abortion. 

MONGOLISM, a type of idiocy, 
with some similarities to myxedema 
and cretinism. The name apparently 
derives from the slightly orient^ 
look, due to the obliquity of the 
eye slit, mongoloids have. However, 
mongoloids occur throughout the 
world. Three mongoloids are bom in 


520 



MONILIASIS 


MONIliASIS 


every thousand births^ all resembling 
one another. They are smalls rarely 
reaching the height of a normal 
twelve-year-old child. They have 
broad faces with flat or stubby noses, 
and an open, apparently undeveloped 
mouth with large protruding lips. 
Their legs and arms are abnormaliy 
short, the hands thick and the mus¬ 
cles flabby. In most instances the 
senses are deficient, with weak eye¬ 
sight, impaired hearing, and an un¬ 
developed sense of smell. Mongoloids 
have speech difficulties and very 
limited vocabularies and usually are 
only able to utter unintelligible 
sounds. They reach puberty exceed¬ 
ingly late and may learn to walk as 
late as the age of eleven or twelve. 
Frequently mongoloids show little or 
no interest in their environment, live 
in a stupor, and seem unable to per¬ 
form even simple tasks or to take 
care of themselves. Thus their re¬ 
tardation is pronounced enough for 
them to be considered true idiots. 

Often organic defects are present. 
Mongoloids may have a faulty circu¬ 
latory system, or underdeveloped 
brain, liver, and kidney. Physical 
weakness and a susceptibility to lung 
and intestinal infections have always 
been high contributing factors to the 
high death rate among mongoloids 
before the age of maturity. However, 
antibiotics and other dru^ have in¬ 
creased their life span considerably. 

The cause of mongolism is not 
known, but some medical authorities 
believe that it is an interaction and 
interrelation of various factors rather 
than a single cause. Hereditary fac¬ 
tors have not been established as re¬ 


lated to mongolism. S^nce mopgO'Oids 
are prenatal casualties, they can he 
considered as part of the broader 
problem of congenital anomalies. 

A specific cure for mongolism 
not known. Even under the most idea' 
circumstances, mongoloids miE osh 
become about 30 per cent BomaL 
Yet the attitude that aothlng can be 
done and that efforts are useless is 
rather severe. Glandular temedie^^ 
and calcium phosphate are used; but 
the greatest help m patience, compas¬ 
sion, and love. Dr. Thomas Benda, 
an authority on this subject and au¬ 
thor of Mongolism and Cretinism, re¬ 
ports that mongoloids can learn to 
do simple manual chores such as 
household or farm work. He points 
out that they learn by imitating 
others. See also cretinism; feeble¬ 
mindedness; MYXEDEMA. 

MONILIASIS^ a disease caused by 
a yeastlike fungus, Candida albicans, 
and occurring throughout the world, 
among aU races and ages, and in both 

sexes. 

The fungus causes a wide range ot 
infections, from mild disorders of 
the skin and mucous membranes of 
the mouth or vagina, to invasioin 
of the deeper tissues, particularly the 
bronchi, lungs, or meninges. The 
fungus is widespread in nature, and 
has been found in the normal mouth, 
throat, and gastrointestinal tract, as 
well as In patients with long-standing 
diseases, in which the wasted tissues 
offer a good medium for the growth 
of this organisni. 

The most common infection, ora 
thrush, is an acute inflammation o 


52 



MONONUCLEOSIS, INFECTIOUS 


MONONUCLEOSIS, INFECTIOUS 


the rooath, tongue* gums, or phar\fi\, 
oitee found .n undernourished chil- 
ur^fi any daring the first fe% weeks in 
infant iiie It is highly contagions. 
\nolher \*inet3 is vaginal moniliasis, 
which often occurs during pregnancy 
and m diabetics. Monilia infection of 
the skin of the hands often develops 
in bakers, waiters, bartenders, house¬ 
wives, and others whose hands are 
«.otteiied from continual soaking in 
w liter. 

The symptoms vary with the loca¬ 
tion and the intensity of the infection, 
from creamy whitish patches in the 
mucous membranes to fever, cough, 
abscess formation, and meningitis. 

The infection generally responds 
to treatment. Alkaline mouthwashes 
or irrigations with dilute solutions of 
gentian violet clear up infections of 
the mouth. Skin infections have been 
controlled by potassium permanga¬ 
nate soaking, and daily application of 
an ammoniated mercury ointment. 
Nystatin (Mycostatin), a new anti¬ 
biotic which is the first of these drags 
to be effective against this fungus in¬ 
fection without causing undesirable 
reactions, has brought encouraging 
results. 

MONONUCLEOSIS, 1NFEC-. 
nous, a virus infection which 
causes a swelling of the lymph glands 
and changes in the white blood cells. 
The condition occurs in epidemic 
form as well as in scattered cases, 
most commonly in people between 
the ages of tea and thirty-five. Re¬ 
cent research has demonstrated pas¬ 
sage of the virus in saliva during 
kissing. 


Some five to fifteen days after 
exposure to the disease, there may be 
a flulike feeling of malaise, fatigue, 
and headache. Fever develops and 
the lymph glands, especially those of 
the neck, become enlarged, giving 
the condition its common name, 
glandular fever. Sore throat is gen¬ 
erally present. 

The condition develops in many 
different ways. Sometimes skin erup¬ 
tions with discolored rashes are per¬ 
ceptible; the liver may be affected, 
causing a jaundiced appearance of 
the skin; and occasionally the heart, 
lungs, and central nervous system are 
involved. The spleen is also fre¬ 
quently enlarged. In still other cases, 
ail the symptoms may pass un¬ 
noticed. Infectious mononucleosis is 
manifested by characteristic changes 
in the blood, an increase in the wMte 
blood cells and some changes in their 
structure. 

Infectious mononucleosis usually 
runs its course within three to six 
weeks, and recovery is generally un¬ 
complicated and complete. Occasion¬ 
ally the spleen and the lumph nodes 
may remain enlarged for some time 
after the other symptoms have dis¬ 
appeared. 

Bed rest and limitation of activities 
are considered essential and in severe 
cases may have to be prolonged, even 
after all fever or acute symptoms 
have subsided. Hot salt gargles or 
throat irrigations are often given to 
relieve sore throat. Special diets are 
usually prescribed when jaundice de¬ 
velops. Ameomycin and chloram¬ 
phenicol have recently been used, and 
may be effective in controEing the 
condition. 



MOiON 


MOTION SICKNESS 


moron* See feeble-mindedness. 

MOMPHME* Of the approximately 
tweaty alkaloids m opium, morphine, 
a glossy colorless crystalline narcotic 
base, is the chief one and largely 
responsible for the effects of opium. 
As morphine acts reliably and quickly 
and is especially suited for hypo¬ 
dermic use, medicine employs it 
widely as a pain reliever. Morphine 
can be habit-forming. See also drug 

ADDICTION. 

MORTALITY, DECLINE IN. The 
great reductions in mortality before 
mid-life reflect essentially the con¬ 
trol achieved over the acute and 
chronic infectious diseases during 
the twentieth century. Their control 
has contributed to the leveling of 
mortality geographically as well as 
among the races and social-econo¬ 
mic classes. It has also left the sick¬ 
nesses associated with the aging 
process as the dominant causes of 
current mortality. The control of 
infectious diseases was accomplished 
by progress on many fronts, includ¬ 
ing advances in medical science, 
growth of the public health move¬ 
ment with its early emphasis on pre¬ 
ventive measures, rise in the level of 
living, and improvement of both the 
home and work environment. At the 
same time, the population has be¬ 
come increasingly health conscious 
and also better equipped to finance 
its medical care needs. 

MOSQUrrOy an insect, the female 
of which has a long proboscis with 
which it can puncture the skin of 
man and animals to draw blood. Some 
species transmit certain diseases, such 


as malaria, yellom^ fe\er, dengue, 
and some forms of filariasis. 

The anopheles, vhich carr> ma¬ 
laria, usually lay their eggs in fre<u 
W’ater which has surface \egclation, 
although some also breed in poilcltd 
water or marshes. The aedes, 
carry yellow fever, are usuall}^ foond 
breeding about dw^ellings, as are the 
culex, which cany" the filaria ’ftoroi. 

The primary protecti\e measure 
against mosquitoes is to prevent their 
breeding. This involves getting rid of 
stagnant water, draining and filling 
pools and marshes, covering v^eils, 
open cisterns, water-filled barrels or 
tubs. Chemicals are used in large- 
scale mosquito control, and DDT is 
effective against the larvae of ail 
mosquitoes but must be carefully 
employed since it is toxic to wildlife. 
DDT sprays are also effective around 
and in the house. Every home should 
have drains and windows effectively 
screened. People living in regions 
where mosquitoes are prevalent 
should wear protective clothing and 
use repellents such as dimethyl 
phtholate, which is available as a 
cream. See also dengue; malaria; 

YELLOW FEVER. 

MOTION SICKNESS, a condition 
produced in some persons when they 
are in a moving boat, car, bus, air¬ 
plane, elevator, swing, or other con¬ 
veyance. The exact cause of motion 
sickness has not been established, but 
it is thought that the semicircular 
canals in the internal ear which are 
associated with balance are involved, 
and the seiis« of sight, stnel, taste, 
and hearing also seem to be factors. 

523 



MOUNTAIN SICKNESS 


MOUNTAIN SICKNESS 


Characteristic symptoms are nausea, 
headache, dizziness, and vomiting. 

Certain conditions aggravate the 
tendency to motion sickness—^for ex¬ 
ample, a stuffy unventilated en¬ 
closure, unpleasant odors, or irritat¬ 
ing or loud noises. More people 
become sick during the day than the 
night, some persons are sick when 
they ride backwards but not when 
they ride forwards, and reading or 
other close use of the eyes will some¬ 
times be contributory. Persons with 
chronic infections of the sinuses and 
of the ears are more likely to suffer 
from airsickness than others. 

The best and most effective drugs 
now available for prevention or treat¬ 
ment of motion sickness are Mare- 
zine, Bonamine, and Dramamine. 
Marezine does not bring on as much 
drowsiness as the other drugs and its 
effect is almost immediate. It lasts 
about four hours and should be taken 
fifteen minutes before departure. 
Bonamine lasts an entire day, but, 
like Dramamine, is apt to cause 
drowsiness. Dramamine is excellent 
for quieting the nerves and therefore 
of benefit to nervous travelers and 
persons with organic conditions in 
whom vomiting might be injurious. 
For severe cases of vomiting, the 
doctor may prescribe a combination 
of Dramamine and Marezine, which 
is administered in the form of rectal 
suppositories. 

Jfeverai measures can be taken to 
help prevent motion sickn^s. When 
riding in smaller vehicles, sitting low 
near the center of gravity subjects the 
person to as little motion as possible. 
Children may sit on the floor of a 


car. In an airplane, a left-hand 
window should be avoided, since 
most turns and banks are made to 
the left. Rich, heavy, and gas-forming 
foods should not be eaten before be¬ 
ginning a trip. It is a good idea to 
eat moderately and not overload the 
stomach, and keep alcoholic bever¬ 
ages at a minimum. If symptoms 
of motion sickness appear during 
flight, the person should slide down 
the seat as far as possible with his 
head and neck supported. In severe 
cases of motion sickness, ample bed 
rest is advisable, and a plentiful in¬ 
take of fluids, intravenously if neces¬ 
sary. The person susceptible to mo¬ 
tion sickness should be kept warm, 
but make sure he gets plenty of fresh 
air at all times. Adequate sleep before 
and during the trip will also help 
stave off motion sickness. 

MOUNTAIN SICKNESS, an illness 
of discomfort suffered by those who 
climb high mountains. Most people 
are accustomed to living at altitudes 
of less than 5,000 feet above sea 
level, and at altitudes of 12,000 feet 
or more they are likely to undergo 
radical physical changes. For ex¬ 
ample, as the oxygen pressure goes 
down, an increase is likely in the 
depth and rhythm of breathing, and 
also in the number of red blood cells. 
At the same time, the hemoglobin, 
the red coloring matter in the blood, 
will probably take up more and more 
of the oxygen for its use. 

A lack of sufficient oxygen is the 
cause of mountain sickness. The 
symptoms include dizziness, head¬ 
ache, vomiting, and difficulty in 


524 


MOUTH 


MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS 


thioMag, reading, writing, hear¬ 
ing, and seeing. Nosebleed may also 
occur in advanced cases, and the 
temperature is likely to rise. The 
person may suffer a weakness in the 
limbs so pronounced that he will 
find it difficult to continue walking 
or climbing. The need to keep the 
tissues supplied with oxygen may 
also increase the pulse rate. 

Treatment of mountain sickness is 
primarily a matter of slowing down 
the entire body function until the 
person has learned the technique of 
accommodating his body to the 
higher altitudes. 

MOUTH. The mouth is the opening 
through which animal or man takes 
in food, or the cavity containing or 
the parts including the masticating 
apparatus. The mouth consists of the 
vestibule, which is the space between 
the cheeks and teeth and the cavity 
of the mouth proper behind the 
teeth. The roof of the mouth is 
formed by the hard palate and the 
floor of the mouth is occupied by the 
tongue. The large salivary glands, 
known as the parotids, open into the 
vestibule and are on each side, and 
there are also numerous smaE sali¬ 
vary glands. The whole cavity of the 
mouth B lined with mucous mem¬ 
brane. Saliva moistens the mouth, 
enables the food to be rolled into 
a plastic ma®, and lubricates the 
food. Saliva also cleanses the mouth 
of bacteria and food particles. 

The mouth is one of the most 
vulnerable are^ of the body as re¬ 
gards dis^e-producing organisms. 
It is also affected by disturbances of 


nutrition, endocrine and metabobsm 
balance of the bodj. 

mTLTIFLE SCLEROSIS, one o! the 

commonest disorders of the nenous 
system. This disease is marked b> in¬ 
terference with muscular moiemmS 
which are finally lost. Degeneraiion 
and scarring of the nervous tissue 
develop very slowly, and outward 
symptoms of multiple sclerosis appear 
only gradually o\er the }ears. Symp¬ 
toms depend on how and where the 
nervous system is damaged. Fre¬ 
quently the first symptom 'is a gradual 
failure of the leg muscles. Leg move¬ 
ments become jerky and spastic and 
eventuafly paralysis occurs. Another 
common symptom is the slowing 
down of speech. The person talks ia 
a monotone, and each syllable is 
uttered with great effort and difficulty. 
The hands tremble, especially when 
a purposeful movemenl is attempted. 
Sometimes, too, the head tends to 
shake. Those suffering with multiple 



disease destroys the while matter of the 

nervous system. 


525 



MUMPS 


MUMPS 


sclerosis generally mamtaia a good 
traine of mind, even when the disease 
reaches an advanced state. Occasion¬ 
ally they become depressed and 
emotionally and mentally disturbed, 
but this is not characteristic. 

The rate of deselopment varies in 
ail cases. However, eventually the 
basic functions, such as sight, hearing, 
and digestion, are involved, and con¬ 
stant nursing becomes a necessity. 
Sometimes this point is not reached 
for many years. 

As yet, nothing is known that will 
arrest or cure the disease. Neverthe- 
iess, the adequacy of the care given 
can make a real difference. General 
and medical care must be properly 
given in order to secure any relief. 
Also, the patient can be protected 
from those conditions which are 
especially threatening to his condi¬ 
tion. Only with such meager methods 
can the effects of the basic disorder be 
held to the minimum at this time. 

Medical researchers are still work¬ 
ing to determine whether or not a 
virus infection or inflammation com¬ 
ing from some toxin is responsible 
for multiple sclerosis. No organism 
has yet been found to which it can 
be attributed. There are instances in 
which the disease makes its appear¬ 
ance after childbirth or a major 
operation, but apparently this is a 
matter of coincidence. No special 
hereefltary factor seems to be in¬ 
volved. It generally appears before 
the age of forty. 

MUMRS, an acute contagious disease 
of early winter and spring. It is more 
dangerous to adults than to children. 


Mumps usually attacks children be¬ 
tween five and fifteen years of age 
and is rare among infants of less 
than ten months of age. While com¬ 
plications are serious, they occur 
in only about one out of a hundred 
cases. The commonest complications, 
according to a report of the U. S. 
Public Health Service, are “inflam¬ 
mation of the sex glands, sometimes 
causing sterility in men, and inflam¬ 
mation of the brain. Mumps may also 
lead to deafness, inflammation of 
other glands or kidney disease.” 
However, mumps is usually such a 
mild disease that approximately a 
third of those who contract it re¬ 
cover without having definitely 
known that they have had it. 

Mumps is caused by a tiny virus, 
the smallest form of infective organ¬ 
ism. The mumps virus, which was 
only definitely isolated in 1937, is 
larger than those causing poliomyeli¬ 
tis, influenza, and yellow fever and 
smaller than those causing rabies, 
cowpox, and t 3 ?phus. 

Mumps is a communicable disease, 
though not as contagious as measles 
and chickenpox. The mumps virus is 
found in discharges of the nose and 
mouth, most frequently in the saliva, 
and is spread to others by personal 
contact or contaminated objects. 
Usually a person has mumps only 
once in a lifetime, since the first 
attack gives the body protective sub¬ 
stances against subsequent attacks. 
Cases axe known, however, in which 
the disease has occurred two or even 
three times. 

The first s 3 nnptoms of mumps 
appear from twelve to twenty-six, 


526 




MUSCLE 


MUSCLE 


but usually eighteen, days after ex¬ 
posure. Usually pain under the ear 
is preceded by chills, fever, headache, 
and loss of appetite. Vomiting and 
nosebleeding may occur, with gradual 
swelling of the gland in front of and 
below the ear and along the angle 
of the jaw. The parotid gland of the 
cheek is the most commonly affected, 
and the technical term for mumps 
is parotitis. The face of the patient 
becomes puffy, and usually the swell¬ 
ing is confined to first one side of the 
face for a few days and later both 
sides. The pain increases when food 
is swallowed. The temperature may 
reach 101° to 104° during the second 
or third day. Fever and swelling will 
subside within a week or ten days. 

While treatment of mumps is not 
specific, it is simple. The patient 
should be kept in bed. His mouth 
must be kept clean, and an antiseptic 
mouthwash and gargle is of great 
value, especially when tonsils and 
throat congestion tend to aggravate 
the symptoms. Elimination of the 
bowels can be regulated with mild 
laxatives. A soft diet mcluding broths, 
gruel, soft-boiled eggs, and custards, 
but especially liquid foods, is given 
while the temperature is about nor¬ 
mal. Hot compresses, more soothing 
than cold, applied locally will make 
the patient more comfortable, as will 
sponging with hot water and keeping 
the face warm and protected from 
chiUs. 

Isolation of all mumps patients is 
now recommended. Those persons 
who nurse them should keep away 
from their faces, since most infections 
come from the nose and mouth, and 


it is also ad\KaMe to wear a n 
the sickroom. 

Fortunately few persons dse ot 
mumps. The rare but dreaded cumpll- 
cations usually develop a‘' the 
glands in the face subside. Pain and 
swelling may evolve in the testes of 
the male and, on rare occasion^, in 
the ovaries and brea-sts ot tfee icmale. 
A form of meningitis may result and 
middle-ear congestion may lead to 
deafness. Other exceptional compli¬ 
cations which may occur in both 
se.xes are pancreatitis, optic neuritis, 
facial paralysis, and permanent en¬ 
largement and dystunction of tlie 
parotid gland. 

In 1945, researchers, adapting the 
mumps virus to eggs, developed a 
mumps vaccine which has been avail¬ 
able since 1950. It is not particularly 
significant for children who have not 
reached puberty, since mumps in chil¬ 
dren is usually mild, and therefore 
routine immunization is not recom¬ 
mended. The vaccine is sometimes in¬ 
dicated for children and young adults 
who live in close quarters with per¬ 
sons having or likely to have mumps. 
For adults, however, in whom mumps 
can be a serious illness, the vaccine 
may be paramoimt. 

MUSeXE, an organ composed of 
muscle tissue, which causes move¬ 
ment of some part of the body be¬ 
cause of its abflity to contract. 
Muscle is also the muscle tissue, 
which is made up of individual 
muscle fibers or cells. It can be clas¬ 
sified as nonstriated (smooth) or 
striated, according to its appearance 


527 



MUSCLE CRAMPS 


MUSCLE DISEASES AND DISORDERS 


u^.dcr a mxrobcope; as bodj, skeletal, 
or carai-iv mii>cle. according to its 
location in the bod>; and as either 
voluntary or involuntary. For ex¬ 
ample, the intestinal muscles are un- 
striated involuntary muscles. 

Muscle tissue enjoys an ample 
blood supply, since in doing its work 
it requires much energy and causes 
a rapid turnover of food materials, 
more than other body tissue. Mus¬ 
cles also are well supplied with 
nerves, both motor, for movement, 
and sensory, for feeling. Besides con¬ 
trolling the movements of muscle, 
the nerve cells in the spinal cord also 
control nutrition; and if the cells 
become diseased, or the fibers are cut 
or fail to function in any way, the 
muscle atrophies from disuse. 

Contraction of muscles calls for 
energy and consequent production of 
waste in the form of lactic acid. 
This causes the tiredness following 
strenuous work or exercise. If the 
muscles are forced beyond the limits 
of endurance, muscle fatigue ensues, 
which calls for a period of rest. Dur¬ 
ing rest, waste products are eliminated 
from the tissues and normal muscie 
activity is restored. 

Skeletal muscles are attached to 
their respective bones by tendons, 
which are a specialized form of 
muscle. Some tendons, such as the 
hamstring tendons at the back of the 
knee, and the Achilles’ tendon above 
the heel, are near the surface. See 
also MUSCLE DISEiteES. 

MUSCLE CRAMPS. See cramp. 

MUSCLE DISEASES AND DIS¬ 
ORDERS. In most cases, diseases 


affecting the muscles result from 
damage to nerves which control the 
feeling and motion of the muscles. 
Muscles are sometimes damaged by 
physical activity; for example, a 
muscle fiber may be tom by a sudden 
jerk or sharp blow or overstretching. 
The biceps muscle in the arm may 
be tom, or occasionally the large 
muscles which manipulate the thumb 
are pulled away. Frequently tendons, 
the fibrous structures by which mus¬ 
cles are attached to the bones, are 
torn. Tearing of muscles in the thigh 
and back of the foot occurs in mn- 
ning and athletic sports in which 
there are sudden turns of the foot 
and leg. 

Sudden severe pain at the point 
where the break of the tendon or 
muscles has occurred is usually the 
first sign of such an injury. This is 
followed by weakness, and frequently 
there is a flow of blood between the 
fibers of the muscles. Clotted blood 
produces pain or irritation. 

In treatment of such injuries, the 
nature and severity of the injury, the 
age of the patient and his general 
condition are significant factors. In 
some cases surgery, to repair serious 
tears of muscles and tendons, may 
be essential as soon as the doctor has 
diagnosed the injury. Skillful surgery 
combined with immobilization by 
cast until healing takes place bring 
good results in most cases. After the 
injury has healed, it is advisable to 
use heat, massage, and controlled 
movement to promote complete re¬ 
covery of the function of the muscle. 
Specialists in the branch of medicine 


525 



MUSCLE DISEASES 
AND DISORDERS 

knowB as kinesiology are trained to 
carry out this treatment 

Muscles may become infected and 
inflamed due to invasion by micro¬ 
organisms. Inflammation of a muscle, 
or myositis, may produce pus and 
abscess, with serious danger to life. 
Trichinosis is an inflammation which 
is localized in the muscles; the para¬ 
site causing the disease grows in the 
muscle tissue of the body after having 
entered the body through the di¬ 
gestive tract. 

In poliomyelitis, inflammation 
causes the destruction of nerve cells 
affecting the action of the muscles, 
and wasting away of these muscles is 
characteristic. Wasting away of mus¬ 
cles and loss of strength is also typical 
of a group of diseases known as mus¬ 
cular dystrophies. The sources of 
these conditions vary and in many 
instances the cause is not known. In 
a typical case, a child, seemingly nor¬ 
mal at birth, will begin at about the 
age of four or five to be unable to use 
his legs properly. The back muscles 
become weak, so that the child can¬ 
not sit erect and he soon has difficulty 
getting up from a prone position. In 
some cases, complete wasting of the 
muscles occurs, whereas in others, 
continued progressive weakness fol¬ 
lows without as much destruction of 
tissues. As the affected musdes be¬ 
come weaker, the stronger or opp(»- 
ing muscles puU, so that the body 
may become twisted and distort^. 

Muscular rheumatism, or fibrodtis, 
is inflammation in the connective 
tissue which is mingled throughout a 
muscle. 



M»sde Disaasss and Oisordert-Tbere 
ore ever 600 muicle$ in the bedy, oil at¬ 
tached to the 206 bones making up the 
skeleton. Many of these muscles are ar¬ 
ranged in opposition to one another so os 
to moke movement of the head, limbs, and 
other parts possible in severot directions. 


f nn 



MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY 


MYASTHENIA GRAVIS 


A tumor in a muscle is called a 
mv-'ma. Cancer of the muscle is 
curable, pio'ided an early diagnosis 
is made. Therefore, any lump in a 
muscle should not be neglected or 
disregarded, but thoroughly examined 
by a doctor. See also atrophy; back¬ 
ache; cramp; FiBROSiTis; lumbago; 
poLsoMYELiris; rheumatism; 
SPRAIXS; TRICHINOSIS. 

\Si .SCLL\R DYSTROPHY. See 

\U i I :)!Sl \Si S \\n DISORDl R.S. 

xMUSHROOM POISONING. Mush- 
rooms are fleshy fungi of the basidi- 
omycetous variety. Mushroom poi¬ 
soning occurs from eating the 
poisonous type. Sporadic causes of 
mushroom poisoning appear, usually 
due to inexperienced mushroom gath¬ 
erers who have not learned the 
simple directions for distinguishing 
the poisonous from the edible mush¬ 
room. 

The amanita phalloides, which 
yield the toxic phallin, and the 
amanita muscaria, which jdeid the 
toxic muscarin, are mushrooms most 
commonly responsible for poisoning. 
From time to time other specimens, 
some of them previously undescribed, 
are reported to have had poisonous 
effects. For example, medical author¬ 
ities in Oregon have warned of eating 
the mushroom galerina venenata, 
which has brought about many 
deaths. 

In mmt cases, symptoms of mush¬ 
room poisoning are apparent within 
six to fourteen hours after the fungi 
have been ingested. The victims have 
severe abdominal pains, watery diar¬ 

530 


rhea, unquenchable thirst, and the 
skin quickly becomes blue. Muscular 
convulsions are followed by collapse 
and frequently death. The galerina 
venenata causes severe damage to 
the gaslrointestinal, renal, cardio¬ 
vascular, liver, and central nervous 
systems. Treatment must be given as 
promptly as possible in all cases of 
mushroom poisoning. Purgatives are 
used to empty the intestines and a 
stomach pump to evacuate the stom¬ 
ach. Atropine has proved a good 
antidote for muscarine poisoning. See 
also FOOD poisoning; poisoning. 
MUSTARD, a yeUow powder made 
of the ground seed of a yellow- 
flowered genus of plants, Brassica. 

Medically mustard is used as an 
emetic in digestive disorders and as 
an agent to cause redness of the skin. 
In first aid for poisoning, it induces 
vomiting. A footbath of one table¬ 
spoon of mustard to a gallon of hot 
water is a time-honored comfort in 
the common cold and stimulates the 
circulation in the feet and legs. 

A mustard plaster, made of a mix¬ 
ture of mustard, flour, and water, acts 
as a counterirritant to draw blood to 
the area where the mustard plaster is 
applied. In bronchitis, for example, 
a mustard plaster applied to the chest 
relieves the feeling of congestion. 
Since a mustard plaster can be so 
strong as to blister the skin, it should 
be milder for women and children 
than men, and should not be left on 
for more than fifteen to twenty 
minutes at a time. 

MYASTHENIA GRAVIS, a chronic 
disease of the nervous system, affect- 




been associated with overactivity of of disease or SOTgical removal. The 





MYXEDEMA 


MYXEDEMA 


5ve and forty-fi'.e. principally 
women, than ufiier age groups. The 
condition, therefore, ha'; been called 
“acquired cretinism.” Cretinism is 
3 csjad'tion due lo thyroid deficiency 
which is characterized by stunting of 
phj'ical and mental development. 

luveaile rr.vxedema, which usually 
affiicts children around puberty, is 
heated as a form of cretinism. Gen- 
«aih it is not as serious in its mental 
and physical consequences if treat¬ 
ment is instituted early enough. 

Symptoms of myxedema, manifold 
as they are, develop slowly and many 
months may pass before they are 
distinct enough to be easily diag¬ 
nosed. Some of the more significant 
symptoms are absence of perspira¬ 
tion, loss of hair, decay of teeth, 
general weakness, thickening of the 
skin of the nose and its mucous mem¬ 
branes, swelling of the lips, abnormal 
sensitivity to cold, a stiff walk, pro¬ 
nounced hoarseness, and often men¬ 
tal abnormalities. 


Before treatment with thyroid was 
mtroduced, the chance of survivai 
was usually very low. The milder 
form of the disease can now be cured 
by administration of sufficient and 
graduated doses of thyroid gland ex¬ 
tract. In severe cases the symptoms 
can be controlled by similar treat¬ 
ment, which must be carefully ad¬ 
justed by the physician, sometimes by 
trial and error. 

Strict surveillance and hospitaliza¬ 
tion may be essential in the early 
period of treatment because of pos¬ 
sible pronounced changes in the gen¬ 
eral condition of the patient during 
prolonged treatment with thyroid. 
Symptoms may disappear, one after 
another, after a short time, and the 
physical change in the patient’s ap¬ 
pearance will be remarkable. Con¬ 
tinued administration of small doses 
of thyroid gland during the lifetime 
of the patient has been found essen¬ 
tial to sustain the improvement. See 
also cretinism; thyroid gland. 


532 



NAIL BITING, a behavior problem 
cortimoE among cliiidren and not un¬ 
usual among aduits. Children often 
put their fingers in their mouths un¬ 
consciously-—for example, hile 
reading a book or watching a motjon 
picture when they are apparently 
calm. High-strung children will usu¬ 
ally succumb to biting their nails 
more easily than calm ones. The rea¬ 
sons for a person to bite Ms nails are 
varied, including tenseness, lack of 
manual activity, or emotional dis- 
terbaoce* Scolding, nagging, threat¬ 
ening, shaming, or applying bad-tast- 
ing ointment or mechanical restraints 
to the fingers will aggravate rather 
then help overcome nail biting. More 
successful is an appeal to the pride 
or vanity or maturity of the child. 
Sometimes a change in the parents’ 
general attitude toward the child will 
make him feel more secure and sub¬ 
sequently stop biting his nails* 

NAUS. The nails, located at the end 
of the fingers and toes, are elastic 


horny plates, cemposeci cel's h/li 
abundant quantities m ker.dm, 
basis of ail horn} tissue. Then 
thin, flattened, ariil slii:iitly roiindeJ 
at the edge. C7onceaIed in the skin aie 
the roots of the nails and the prs'- 
ducer of the nails, the matrix. The 
thin and therefore sshite '‘half-mocm" 
or lunula extends into the visible part 
or body of the naiL Average heallhs 
fingernails grow about 1 30th of an 
inch a week and toenails about a 
fourth this speed. A healthy oaii i\ 
pinkish, smooth, and naturally 
lemporary^ ridges or spots maj be 
evident e'ven in healthy persons. 

Abnormal conditions in Ihe 
strength, texture, color, brittleness, 
and growth of nails are iiidicalixe of 
the state of health ot the body. Dark 
brown or blue spots may result from 
some undesirable ccmdiiloa, possibly 
an infection or inorganic poisoning. 
Pale and soft nails may occur from a 
deficiency of calciom, and nails with 
a bluish tinge sometimes indicate 

5ii 



NARCOLEPSY 


NARCOLEPSY 


roor circulation. Wliite spots are usu- 
I'.’iV due to minor injuries or pressure, 
a.nd repair, as in most nail conditions, 
iv rapid if the matrix is not destroyed. 

The matrix of the nail may be in¬ 
jured by burns or frostbite so that 
growth is impeded. Nutritional de¬ 
ficiencies and circulatory disorders 
may result in unduly fragile, brittle, 
or split nails. Similar symptoms, to¬ 
gether with irregular development, 
can be obsen'ed as an indication of 
digestive changes and in some skin 
diseases. In many cases, nails stop 
growing during infantile spinal pa¬ 
ralysis and hemiplegia paralysis. 

Paronychia, a pus-producing in¬ 
flammation characterized by swelling, 
shininess, and extreme tenderness of 
the skin around the nail, is a fairly 
frequent condition. It heals quickly 
if measures are taken to prevent its 
spread under the naU. 

A nail that has been struck or 
pinched may turn purple or black, 
due to blood that forms beneath the 
nail, and the nail may detach from 
the bed. If pain is severe, the doctor 
can relieve it by releasing the blood 
from under the nail. Splinters or 
thorns are sometimes pushed under 
the nail. If they do not work out 
naturally, they may have to be re¬ 
moved by a doctor, who splits the 
nail. 

Among workers who are exposed 
to certain chemicals, contact der¬ 
matitis may develop. This skin in¬ 
flammation sometimes results in a 
complete separation of the nail, 
called onycholosis. If the matrix is 
injured, the nail will not grow again. 
In some nervous and vascular dis¬ 


eases or some vitamin deficiencies, 
the nails become inflamed and fall 
out. 

Hangnails, as annoying and pain¬ 
ful as they may be, have little medi¬ 
cal significance other than that they 
serve as an entry for bacteria, and 
trimming and use of an antiseptic is 
the only treatment required. Ingrow¬ 
ing nails are a more serious problem. 
Most often due to constant pressure 
against a toe by tight shoes, ingrown 
nails may result in swollen and in¬ 
flamed feet, and the nail may be em¬ 
bedded in an exceedingly sensitive in¬ 
flamed area. At times, a portion of 
the nail must be removed by opera¬ 
tion, which is not painful under local 
anesthesia. Toenails should not be 
trimmed down at the corners, since 
this will aggravate ingrown toenails. 
Other care of the nails includes keep¬ 
ing the cuticle soft, so that it will 
not tear and cause hangnails, and 
clipping or filing off rough edges of 
the nail. 

Peeling of the nails can result from 
injury, but more often is due to 
their long length, or occurs among 
persons who constantly use their 
hands, such as typists or pianists. 
Housewives, whose hands are fre¬ 
quently in water and soap and harsh 
cleaning fluids, often have dry brit¬ 
tle nails. Wearing protective rubber 
gloves will greatly help to keep the 
hands and nails in good condition. 

NARCOLEPSY, recurring sudden 
attacks of irresistible sleep. In some 
cases it may be accompanied by a 
cataplexy, or tonelessness of the mus- 


534 




NEARSIGHTEDNESS 


NlFHRifiS 


cles. Here the person has spells of 
muscular weakness, often following 
anger, laughter, fright, or a startling 
Qoise, The knees may give w^ay and 
the person fall to the ground, but 
Without loss of coQsciousiiess. 

Narcolepsy occurs in persons suf¬ 
fering from certain brain diseases, 
and has also been known to de\e}op 
after serious injury to the head. Some 
cases have been associated with tu¬ 
mors involving certain portions of 
the brain. In other instances, exces¬ 
sive sleepiness or ease of failing 
asleep has been part of a mental 
condition. 

Narcolepsy usually occurs in peo¬ 
ple who are rather undynaoiic and 
lethargic. The person with narcolepsy 
generally manages to stay awake 
while working at something that in¬ 
terests Mm, but when left alone or 
when lying down he quickly falls 
asleep. Persons with narcolepsy have 
even been known to sleep wMle 
standing in a bus. Narcolepsy is 
sometimes also associated with a 
condition of hunger called bulimia. 
Few people die of narcolepsy, unless 
as a result of an accident. 

In treatment of narcolepsy, am¬ 
phetamine, or Benzedrine, has been 
found useful in preventing the attack 
of sleep. People who are subject to 
certain forms of heart symptoms, 
such as palpitations, trcmulousness, 
and internal tension, as a result of 
taking Benzedrine may take Dexe- 
drine. In especially severe cases of 
cataplexy, potassium chloride is 
given. These drugs are powerful and 
should never be used unless pre¬ 
scribed by a doctor. 


Ni:ARSl€Ii1IJ3MAS. 

NECROSIS* Stc . 

NEPHRITIS, ct t!re 

kidneys. Like Bricntk d:se .mj, wun 
which it is often con^ki^.rta s\non\- 
mous, this term uctiudh not 

one but a group of di^irders with 
similar symptom.^. Albumin h almost 
always present in the urine. Dropsy 
is another condition in which a breaks 
down in the excretors s\stem of the 
kidneys causes the retention of liq« 
uid and swelling in various parts of 
the body. 

The intimate connection between 
albumin in the urine, dropsy, aiid 
disordered kidneys was first pointed 
out by a British doctor, Richard 
Bright, in 1827, and his name became 
a designation for any condition in 
which these symptoms appeared. Sev¬ 
eral different kidney disturbances are 
distinguished, each with a special 
technical name, a few of which are 
acute and chronic glomeriiloaephritis, 
chronic pyelonephritis, and arterioiar 
nephrosclerosis. 

Nephritis is a major health prob¬ 
lem. More than 100,000 people an¬ 
nually die of nephritis in the United 
States. This is 7 per cent of all deaths, 
making it the fourth greatest cause of 
death. 

The discovery of albuminuria, or 
albumin in the urine, is a symptom 
which must not be regarded lightly, 
because nephritis is detected most 
easily and quickly by the discovery 
of albumin in the urine, wMch may 
have grave consequences. Albumi¬ 
nuria, which may be found during a 


535 



N'EFHRi^tS 


NEPHRITIS 


•' ^ - it un. mil* 

. -..i t^'v 1” 

■> ; H 1 i' ’'V it'-t 1 

' v^c* " i’ in.itn'' 

- "«’■ '.ji -r s It ’"a'. '’3 ^em.u 

f ■'’'s »*'■'' i "ot ha’vt other 

, '’d .1 ,■> i^s kid¬ 
's ' ir rot tufficier.th 

t >u*> ^ i t^i-sosiv 01 nephritis In 

f.» • ^ n* s'f 2(* OoO men 

* iii albumnuna when irst examined. 
H nsesiT, in a Solkmup, two-thirds of 
th s 5 3 per cent proved to have 
s own It onfv temporarily, and m 
k*nh h 5 s>t those who did show it 
was (1 ere real evidence of kidney dis¬ 
ease 

W'astes are extracted from the 
bkwd which passes through more 
than two miMioa tiny filters in the 
kidneys. From each of these tubules 

the blood emerges through a channel 

that is only a seventh as large as 
that by which it entered. The result 
IS a squeezing effect. Blood flows 
back into the general blood stream 
by being forced under pressure 
through the wails of the channel. 
The wall filters out waste products 
which ultimately are collected in the 
urinary bladder and excreted as urine. 
Albuminuria is a signal that there 
has been interference with this proc¬ 
ess. 

The first symptom of nephritis 
may be detection of albumin in the 
urine or a vague feeling of illness 
or minor disturbances of other func¬ 
tions, such as a slight elevation in 
blood pressure. Unusual fatigue and 
listlessness, diminished appetite and 
headaches may be manifest. As the 


di-order pi ogresses, a typical train of 
c\ents usually ensues. The sight is 
‘'igfatlv disturbed. The need to uri¬ 
nate at night may interrupt sleep. 
Weight may be either lost or, with 
waterlogging of tissues, gained. 
Gradually more serious symptoms 
appear, including nausea, sometimes 
dunhea, vomiting, and enlargement 
of the abdomen due to fluid associ¬ 
ated with lung and liver congestion. 
As the condition becomes more se¬ 
vere, unconsciousness and convul¬ 
sions may supervene. 

Acute nephritis or glomerulone¬ 
phritis ordinarily has a rapid course, 
but if treatment is sufficiently early 
and adequate, fatality is rare. Typi¬ 
cally a disease of young adults and 
of children, this is the form of kidney 
disorder most frequently called 
Bright’s disease; the exact cause is un¬ 
known. Secondary effects of infection 
elsewhere in the body caused particu¬ 
larly by streptococci are frequently 
suspected to be the primary source. 
The kidneys themselves, however, are 

not infected nor can the specific or¬ 

ganisms be found in them. Toxic sub¬ 
stances such as certain metals can 
incite acute nephritis. 

Wffien kidney inflammation is sus¬ 
pected, the urine should be examined 
without delay. If albumin is present 
it wiU collect and coagulate when 
tested wfith heat or strong acid. In 
nephritis, examination of the urine 
will also show red blood cells and 
tiny molds of the minute tubes in the 
kidneys, which may be composed of 
any of numerous substances; these 
are called hyaline, granular or blood 
(^ts, or some other name. Urine tests 


536 








NEPHRITIS 


NEPHilTIS 


are esseatial not only as an initial 
diagnostic aid but also to trace the 
progress of the disease. Acute nephri¬ 
tis may persist for a few weeks or 
some months, but usually terminates 
In eight to ten weeks. 

Acute nephritis was formerly con¬ 
sidered a fatal disease. Actually, how¬ 
ever, about 90 per cent of those who 
have nephritic symptoms get w^ell, 
with prompt diagnosis and adequate 
treatment. The other 10 per cent tend 
to become eventually chronically 
nephritic. 

Rather than a specific remedy, 
treatment of nephritis demands ad- 


actua'h he 

and frequeni bowel m ae 

oiten encourajtd ai ^ ■> c imi* 

nate as much iS inJ 

thus take work clI the HJne>s 
When acute pefhnti^ iseroualj 
becomes chronic a trar'^itionaf staee, 
called nephrosis, mas mter^eiv The 
manifestations inciLde reJuted 
amount of unoe, iiijb aunc i n uniri, 
genera! edema, and fluid lo tlie ab* 
dominal and chest casities Tfass iiias 
persist for weeks or sears, and f best 
treated in a hospital where the com¬ 
plicated tests of internal conditions 
on which prescription of treatment 












NEPHROSIS 


NEPHROSIS 


by Richard Bright, cave nse to the 
incorrect assumption that any type of 
nephritis is extremely serious. It is 
often oalv one aspect of a general 
condition of disordered blood ves¬ 
sels. In such instances death may 
come not only from uremia but from 
a stroke or failure of the heart. Some 
patients become invalids and live 
only a few years, while others are 
active, under certain restraints, for 
much longer periods. 

Treatment is focused on the pre¬ 
vention of further infection, regula¬ 
tion of the intake of fluids and other 
substances, and constant observation 
by the physician of the progress of 
the disease. Nephritis is so variable 
from patient to patient that standard 
rules for diagnosis or treatment can¬ 
not be set forth. 

Any person whose urine has re¬ 
vealed albumin should have a general 
medical checkup at least once a year. 
The kidneys possess great reserve 
power. Even when substantial parts 
of them no longer function the re¬ 
maining healthy portions maintain 
a necessary minimum activity. See 
also KIDNEYS. 

NEPHRC^tS, any degeneration of 
the kidney without signs of inflamma¬ 
tion, one of the commonest chronic 
diseases of children and one of the 
least understood. It produce serious 
disturbances of other bodily func¬ 
tions as well as that of the kidney. 
The fluid that should be passed on 
through the kidneys to the bladder 
for disposal is instead distributed 
throughout the body, causing swell¬ 
ings called edema. The face is so 


badly swollen that the eyes are al¬ 
most closed. The stomach may be 
distended to about twice its normal 
size and the swelling extend down 
to the feet. 

Frequently a few days or weeks or 
months after the illness is first ob¬ 
served, the child will pass a large 
quantity of urine and his swelling 
will disappear within a few days. This 
IS known as diuresis and it may 
occur spontaneously and frequently 
throughout the course of the disease, 
although there is no consistent pat¬ 
tern. The edema-free period follow¬ 
ing diuresis may last only a few days, 
several weeks, or even months, or it 
may be permanent. Complete re¬ 
covery rarely occurs in less than two 
years after the onset of the disease 
and sometimes much longer. Why 
nephrosis disappears has not yet been 
explained. A low-salt diet and ACTH 
or cortisone seem to have been the 
prime factors in helping some pa¬ 
tients. Formerly approximately 50 
per cent of all nephrotic children 
died. New methods of treatment have 
reduced this rate to some degree. 
Many of the deaths have not occurred 
as a direct result of the disease, but 
from peritonitis or other infections 
to which these children are highly 
susceptible. Today these infections 
are usually controlled by antibiotics. 

After the child has returned from 
the hospital, every possible precau¬ 
tion should continue to be taken 
against infections, since even tonsil¬ 
litis may lead to fatal complications. 
The psychological well-being of the 
patient is also significant, and his 


538 



NERVE 


NERVOUS SYSTEM 


life should be as normal as possible. 
See also kidneys. 

NERVE. See nervous system. 

NERVOUS BREAKDOWN, a pop¬ 
ular, inexact term which covers a 
wide variety of mental disorders. 
Any form of mental or emotional 
difficulty, from the mildest anxiety 
state to the most severe form of in¬ 
sanity, can be called “nervous break¬ 
down” by the layman. Since the term 
is so broad as to elude de&iition, it 
is never really applicable to any 
condition. 

NERVOUS SYSTEM, the entire 
nervous apparatus of the body. It 
controls all muscular movements, 
both voluntary and involuntary; is 
responsible for thought processes; 
regulates such body functions as cir¬ 
culation, respiration, digestion, and 
elimination; and conducts pain and 
other sensations to the brain. 

The nervous system includes the 
central nervous system, comprising 
the brain and spinal cord; and the 
peripheral nervous system which con¬ 
sists of the twelve pairs of cranial 
nerves arising from the brain, three 
pairs of nerves coming from the 
spinal cord, and the nerves of the 
sympathetic or autonomic nervous 
system which supply the internal or¬ 
gans and blood vessels. 

Nerve cells with their fibers are 
the units of the nervous system. The 
operation of the central nervous sys¬ 
tem depends on these nerve cells 
(gray matter) and their nerve fibers 
(white matter). The function of the 


gray matter is to generate and dis¬ 
patch nert^e impulses. The function 
of the white matter is to conduct 
these impulses to and from the ceik 
m the gray matter. 

Nerve tissue itself consists of ceiis 
with nuclei and threadlike axons 
which conduct impulses from the 
nerve cells. Most nerve cells also 
have relatively short processes called 
dendroos which conduct impulses 
into the cell. Impulses normally flow 
in one direction only. In the afferent 
nerve they flow toward the nerve 
centers and in the efferent nerve 
they flow away from the cell. A 
nerve cell with axon and dendron 
is called a neuron and the entire 
structure of the nervous system is 
made up of relays of neurons. 

A nerve consists of bundles of 
nerve fibers and is supplied with 
blood vessels, lymphatics, and nerves. 
Some nerves are afferent, some are 
efferent, and others are mixed. 

Impulses of many sorts travel down 
the paths in the spinal cord, while 
others enter it and travel upward to 
the brain. 

Injuries and diseases of the nerves. 
When nerves axe divided, the part 
separated from the nerve cells under¬ 
goes degeneration. Regeneration may 
take place in time, depending on the 
extent of the injury. However, when 
the fibers within the brain and spinal 
cord are divided, regeneration does 
not follow. 

Certain drugs, like bromides and 
the new tranquilizers, may diminish 
the activity of the nerve cells. Other 
drugs can increase activity. Similar 

539 













NEURALGIA 


NEURITIS 


effects are produced by the toxins of 
various disease germs. In some cases 
nerve cells may be killed. Physical 
injury can also damage nerve tissue. 

Nerve cells weakened by inflam¬ 
mation may recover if the damaging 
cause is removed, but nerve cells that 
are destroyed, as in poliomyelitis, 
cannot be replaced. 

Sclerosis is the name given to a 
fibrous change of the supporting 
tissue in the brain or spinal cord. 
Nervous tissue may be converted into 
a fibrous mass, and may also be 
damaged by pressure from tumors 
from within or from tumors or other 
swellings in adjoining tissue. 

Poor nutrition may weaken nerve 
tissue. Degenerative softening of 
nervous tissue is caused by depriva¬ 
tion of the blood supply. Disorders 
of the endocrine glands may also up¬ 
set nerve cell metabolism. If a nerve 
is blocked, loss of sensation and pa¬ 
ralysis and wastmg of muscles ensues. 
Diseases affecting the brain are dan¬ 
gerous to the nerve centers. These 
include centers for the heart, respira¬ 
tion, blood pressure, and others. See 
also ataxia; brain; multiple scle¬ 
rosis; NExmALGiA; neuritis; paraly¬ 
sis; poliomyelitis; sciatic neuri¬ 
tis; SPINAL cord; sympathetic 
nervous SYSTEM. 

NEURALGIA means pain in a 
nerve, and the term implies that the 
pain is felt along the nerve or the 
part of the body supplied by it with¬ 


out any corresponding physical 
changes. 

There are many different types of 
neuralgia, depending on the nerve 
involved. Nerves especially apt to be¬ 
come irritable and produce severe 
pain are the brachial nerve in the 
arm, the intercostal nerves running 
between the ribs, the nerves of the 
scalp, and the sciatic nerve. The 
fifth cranial nerve, also known as the 
trigeminal nerve, which supplies the 
forehead, face, and jaw, is most often 
affected with neuralgia. The nerve 
may be so sensitive that even a cold 
current blowing on the face or a 
light touch of a finger to the face 
causes stabbing pain. 

In severe cases of neuralgia, or 
when medical treatment fails, a surgi¬ 
cal operation which destroys the 
nerve roots usually gives permanent 
relief and involves little risk, even for 
elderly persons. In neuralgia affecting 
any nerve, the doctor first determines 
the nerve area involved and then 
takes steps to prevent the sensation 
of pain from traveling along that 
nerve. To do this, he may use seda¬ 
tive drugs, inject local anesthetics or 
alcohol, or treat the nerves with 
x-rays. Diagnosis is more difficult in 
those cases in which the sensations of 
pain are mental rather than physical 
in origia. See also tic douloureux. 

NEURITIS, inflammation of a nerve 
or of a nerve sheath. It is distin¬ 
guished from neuralgia, in which 


Nervous System—The nervous system is the body-coordinating system Shown here are 
the nerves making up the peripheral system leading to the muscles, internal organs, and 
other parts of the body outside the broin and central nerve cord 


541 



NEUROLOGICAL AND NEUROMUSCULAR DISORDERS 


there is pain but not inflammation. 
In neuritisj, pain and tenderness are 
felt over an area supplied by the 
particular nerve affected. It may be 
limited to one nerve or affect several, 
as in multiple neuritis or polyneuritis. 
Neuritis of the optic nerve can cause 
temporary or even permanent blind¬ 
ness. 

Other symptoms of neuritis include 
loss of feeling or disturbance of sen¬ 
sation and sometimes paralysis, so 
that it is impossible to move the 
affected area. Many different causes 
of neuritis are recognized. Some 
types result from frostbite, disloca¬ 
tion, poor posture in sleep, drugs or 
injections, cold or radiation treat¬ 
ment. Neuritis occurs in cases of 
chronic alcoholism, arsenic or lead 
poisoning, with or following diabetes, 
in infectious diseases like diphtheria 
or malaria, in rheumatism and occa¬ 
sionally in influenza. It can also be 
present in cases of nutritional defi¬ 
ciencies, especially when vitamin B is 
deficient, as in beriberi. 

Treatment of neuritis depends on 
the doctor’s diagnosis of the under¬ 
lying cause, and the treatment is 
directed toward removing that cause. 
For relief of pain, analgesic drugs 
and barbiturate sedatives are given. 
Limiting movement of limbs and pro¬ 
viding rest, followed by moderate 
movement, is helpful. During the 
acute phase, heat also helps to allevi¬ 
ate pain. Other specific measures, 
such as diet adjustment, which may 
include vitamin B supplements, may 
be prescribed by the doctor as the 
individual case demands. See also 
SCIATIC NEmiTIS. 


NEUROLOGICAL AND NEURO¬ 
MUSCULAR DISORDERS. The 
management of degenerative neuro¬ 
logical and neuromuscular disorders 
has greatly improved recently but 
the fundamental cause—and hence 
prevention or specific treatment of 
these conditions — still remains 
obscure. Among these disorders may 
be listed Parkinson’s disease (para¬ 
lysis agitans or shaking palsy), cere¬ 
bral palsy, muscular dystrophy and 
amyotrophic lateral paralysis. 

Parkinson's disease is a condition 
in which something has gone awry 
in the nerve ganglia at the base of 
the brain. Perhaps this results from 
a metabolic failure but no one knows 
for certain. 

The outstanding symptom of 
parkinsonism is tremor (shaking), 
which continues whether a person 
is at rest or moving. The tremor is 
generally most pronounced in the 
hands and arms and usually starts 
there. With this tremor comes rigid¬ 
ity or stiffening of the muscles. 
Along with this usually comes re¬ 
striction of movement so that vic¬ 
tims of parkinsonism tend more and 
more to reduce their activities. This 
in turn damages them both physical¬ 
ly and psychologically. In extreme 
cases, posture slumps seriously. Flu¬ 
ency of speech is often impaired. 

Recently great advances in treat¬ 
ing parkinsonism have been made, 
particularly in the use of new drugs 
and surgery. Deformities caused by 
contracting muscles and consequent 
needless confinement to wheelchair 
or bed constitute a serious problem 


542 



NEUROLOGICAL AND NEUiOMUSCULAi DISORDERS 


to a victim of parkinsonism. Con¬ 
tractures (such as wry neck) almost 
always can be prevented to a large 
extent, however, by strict use of the 
right medicine, regular physical 
therapy, and continual exercise. 
Parkinsonism, when discovered soon 
after its onset, is comparatively easy 
to treat and can be kept under con¬ 
trol. Persons with advanced cases 
often need a great deal more en¬ 
couragement, Many victims profit 
tremendously by psychotherapy. 
Parkinsonism alone does not herald 
an end to work and gainful employ¬ 
ment. 

Drugs used to treat parkinsonism 
are primarily antispasmodics, reduc¬ 
ing muscle spasm. They include old 
drugs, such as hyoscine and bella¬ 
donna, new synthetic chemicals, 
such as artane, and some antihista¬ 
mines. Adjustment of the drug and 
dose schedule to the patient must be 
made by the physician, not the 
patient. Up to the present, surgery 
has failed to produce lasting bene¬ 
ficial effects, with the possible ex¬ 
ception of an operation on the ante¬ 
rior choroidal artery in certain cases. 

Cerebral palsy is a degenerative 
neurological disorder that is closely 
related to Parkinson’s disease. In¬ 
deed, in some classifications, Park¬ 
inson’s disease is considered as a 
form of cerebral palsy. In general, 
however, cerebral palsy is primarily 
a disorder of infancy and childhood; 
Parkinson’s disease of middle and 
old age. 

Cerebral palsy is caused by brain 
lesions which result in loss of con¬ 


trol of body movements—speech, 
hearing, and eye defects—and, 
often, mental retardation. Recent 
investigations suggest that mechani¬ 
cal birth injuries are not as impor¬ 
tant a cause of the disorder as was 
formerly believed. Prenatal causes, 
affecting the developing fetus in the 
womb, are considered to be much 
more important. Anything that rup¬ 
tures or interferes with the blood 
supply to the brain in a developing 
or prematurely born infant may 
result in cerebral palsy. 

The condition is seldom inherited 
and does not run in families. Basic 
treatment consists of neuromuscular 
re-education by which muscles may 
be retrained to perform essential or 
useful functions. 

Demyelinating diseases, in which 
the myelin sheaths that cover and 
“insulate” nerve tissue are damaged 
or destroyed, also continue to pre¬ 
sent a disturbing unsolved problem 
in medical practice and research. 
The most important of these dis¬ 
eases is multiple sclerosis which 
strikes mainly young adults between 
the ages of twenty and forty. The 
disease often lasts for years, with 
symptoms decreasing and increasing 
in severity, but it is usually progres¬ 
sive and eventually kills. Until the 
conclusion, much can be done for 
the physical comfort and morale of 
the victim. Research clues in demye- 
iinating diseases have proved dis¬ 
appointing, despite much attention 
to the probelm. 

See also cerebral palsy; paralysis 

AGITANS. 


543 



NEUROSIS 


NIGHT TERRORS 


NEUROSIS, an emotionai disorder, 
but without a severe accompanying 
personality change. It refers to the 
type of adjustment a person has made 
to situations which he unconsciously 
feels may cause him anxiety. The 
type of adjustment constitutes the 
nature of the neurosK. The cause is 
usually attributed to the existence 
within the person of an emotional 
conffict, contradictory desires, usually 
of a highly complex nature. 

Several types of neurotic reaction 
can be identified, all of which are an 
attempt by the person to shield him¬ 
self from his inner conflict. In the 
depressive reaction, the person ex¬ 
periences a general sense of physical 
and mental inertia, marked by an 
attitude of general pessimism, self- 
deprecation, and self-absorption. The 
neurotic depression is provoked by 
seemingly nothing, or if it is a re¬ 
sponse to a particular event—^for ex¬ 
ample, the death of a friend—^it be¬ 
comes exaggerated and lengthy and 
eventually seems to exist for itself. 

Amnesia is an extreme type of dis¬ 
sociative reaction. Here the person 
loses awareness of who he is for a 
time, in order to protect himself from 
some impleasant situation. He liter¬ 
ally refuses to be himself. Unlike 
delirium states, a person who has suf¬ 
fered from amnesia can recall under 
hypnosis events which occurred dur¬ 
ing the time, although consciously 
he cannot. 

In conversion reaction, the person, 
rather than face a painful situation, 
imagines that he has some physical 
disorder, such as blindness or in¬ 
ability to move one arm. Since he 


usually has no knowledge of body 
function, the symptoms he describes 
are often inaccurate. 

In phobic reaction, the person de¬ 
velops an intense fear of some par¬ 
ticular thing, such as water or cats. 
This object becomes a substitute or 
symbol for his inner anxiety and 
since he can usually avoid the ob¬ 
ject, he can thus avoid his anxiety. 

These and other neurotic reactions 
constitute an elaborate defense which 
the person sets up to protect himself 
from acknowledging some inner emo¬ 
tional trouble. They operate as safety 
mechanisms which allow the person 
to cope with and adjust to his en¬ 
vironment. Thus he stays in contact 
with reality, as opposed to a psy¬ 
chotic person, who undergoes severe 
personality disorder and loss of con¬ 
tact with reality. See also amnesia; 

INVOLUTIONAL MELANCHOLIA; MANIC 
DEPRESSIVE psychosis; PARANOIA; 

psychoanalysis; schizophrenia. 

NBEMANN-PICK’S DISEASE, an 
acute systemic disorder affecting 
young children in whom there is an 
enlargement of the liver and spleen. 
This rare disease occurs most often 
among infants of Jewish parentage. 
Malnutrition and retardation of men¬ 
tal and physical development are 
common symptoms. Treatment is sel¬ 
dom effective and a child with the 
disease often dies early from sec¬ 
ondary infections. 

NIGHT TORRORS. Children some¬ 
times experience nightmares which 
are intensely disturbing to them. 
Physical factors, such as indigestion, 
intestinal worms, adenoids, or febrile 


544 



NOCAiDiOSiS 


MOSE 


disorders, may be the cause; but more 
often Bight terrors occur in emo¬ 
tionally disturbed children, and if 
they recur, the child should probably 
receive psychiatric help, 

NOCAMBIOSIS5 a rare fungus dis¬ 
ease which may be acquired through 
a superficial skin wound, especially 
on the feet. The infection tends to 
be chronic and spreads through the 
system, affecting the lungs. The symp¬ 
toms resemble those of tuberculosis. 
Afternoon fever, night sweats, cough, 
loss of weight, and general malaise 
are present. 

Nocardiosis is commonly treated 
with sulfadiazine, supplemented by 
bed rest and a nourishing diet for 
several months. 

NOISE. Noise raises the blood pres¬ 
sure; and hardness of hearing, dizzi¬ 
ness, and headache may develop in 
persons whose occupation exposes 
them to excess noise. Repeated ex¬ 
posure to irritating sounds may cause 
echeosis, which is a nervous reaction 
to excessive noise. 

Tinnitus is a ringing, roaring, or 
hissing sound in one or both ears. 
It may be due to many causes, such 
as disease, brain disorder, or as a 
result of certain drugs. When associ¬ 
ated with deafness, tinnitus can be 
caused by wax in the ear; when it 
occurs in connection with acne, 
infection or growth in the ear is 
sometimes the origin. The treatment 
depends on the cause. See also 
deafness; ear; Meniere’s disease. 

NOSEBLEED. See epistaxis. 


NOSE. The nose is primarily com¬ 
posed of bone, cartilage, and tissue. 
The adjoining sinuses are cavities in 
the bones of the head which are con¬ 
nected with the inside of the nose 
by narrow passages. The mucous 
membrane which lines the internal 
surface of the nasal cavities is ex¬ 
tremely sensitive and easily damaged, 
and susceptible to invasion by germs 
and infections. These internal cavities 
also contain hairs which help to pro¬ 
tect the inside of the nose from for¬ 
eign substances, such as germs or 
dust, which might otherwise find too 
easy access. The hair follicles con¬ 
stitute another source of infection. 

Care of the nose. The nose should 
be cleaned with a handkerchief or a 
piece of tissue. Any substances which 
cannot be removed in this manner 
may be loosened with a spray or 
lubricating ointment. A number of 
mild sprays are available, but should 
not be used with force. When a per¬ 
son picks his nose, pulls out internal 
hairs, or attempts to pinch internal 
pimples, he risks damaging the mu¬ 
cous membrane and consequent dan¬ 
ger of certain pus-forming germs 
entering and spreading throughout 
the body. 

A nasal infection can usually be 
recognized by its characteristics of 
redness, swelling, and pain. If the 
condition appears to be severe, a 
physician should be promptly con¬ 
sulted. Furthermore, when disease or 
accident produces a condition which 
is likely to lead to deformity, the 
necessary plastic surgery should be 
done as soon as possible since better 
results can be obtained if the opera- 


545 



NOSE 


NOSE 


tion takes place before the organ has 
improperly healed. 

Foreign bodies in the nose. Worms, 
such as maggots and screw worms, 
sometimes infest the inside of the 
nose. This rarely happens, however, 
unless some abnormal situation al¬ 
ready exists in the nose. For example, 
if a disease with some characteristic 
odor has localized in the nose, worms 
may be attracted to the area and in¬ 
festation begins. The membrane will 
become irritated and the person will 
sneeze more often or have a more 
abundant discharge, perhaps with 
blood. The correction of such an in¬ 
festation is seldom difficult. Often it 
can be cured by simply washing the 
interior of the nose several times with 
a suitable antiseptic solution. 

Polyps. The mucous membrane of 
the nose contains cells which some¬ 
times grow too large, with the result 
that little bodies or polyps protrude 
into the cavity and obstruct normal 
breathing. Their presence may also 
heighten asthmatic symptoms or cer¬ 
tain chronic infections. The polyps 
should be removed. If there is a 
nasal discharge present which comes 
from only one side of the nose, it is 
probable that a foreign substance has 
accidentally lodged in the nose. A 
doctor should be consulted. He will 
examine the nose thoroughly to de¬ 
cide whether or not polyps are pres¬ 
ent. 

Polyps are usually easily removed; 
if they recur, they should again be 
removed. As yet little is known con¬ 
cerning the growth and regrowth of 
polyps. Some scientists believe that 
they are the result of some previous 


infection, but others feel that the in¬ 
fection is the result of polyps rather 
than the cause. The use of radium 
after the removal of polyps will often 
prevent their reappearance, and sur¬ 
gery is frequently followed by mild 
radium treatment, usually after the 
postsurgical inflanunation has disap¬ 
peared which may be several days. 
The presence of polyps in the sinuses 
is more difficult to diagnose. Usually 
a substance opaque to x-ray is intro¬ 
duced into the sinuses before the 
x-ray picture is taken, and the polyps 
can then be seen in the x-ray picture. 

Nosebleed. Since the nose is well 
supplied with blood, its internal tis¬ 
sues are highly sensitive and nose¬ 
bleed occurs frequently. Nosebleed is 
usually present in diseases like hemo¬ 
philia or purpura in which bleeding is 
common and coagulation defective. 
Scurvy, severe anemia, and hardening 
of the arteries may also include nose¬ 
bleed. In arterial hardening involving 
high blood pressure the nosebleed has 
the effect of lowering the blood pres¬ 
sure. Nosebleed can also result from 
breaking the blood vessels of the nose 
by blows, bruises, or internal tumors. 

In treatment of nosebleed, the vic¬ 
tim should be placed on his back in 
order to lower the blood pressure. 
The bleeding will probably stop in a 
few minutes. The person should be 
cautioned against blowing his nose 
since this might start the bleeding 
again. If the nosebleed persists, a 
physician should be called. He may 
pack the nasal cavities with sterilized 
gauze which will be allowed to re¬ 
main in the cavities for only a short 
time because of the danger of block- 


546 



NOSE 


Nose-O ne of the functions of the nose is 
the removal from the air fhaf is breathed; 
of dost, pollens, insects, germs which flow 
on fluid, or other impurities. Within the 
nostrils are found hairs which help this 
screening process These hairs also carry 
away the mucus which keeps the inner por¬ 
tions of the nose moist. In the picture, the 
screen is a symbol of this function. 


Nose—A second function of the nose in 
breathing is the warming of the air to bring 
it to the temperature of the body, which is 
98 6° F. This is accomplished by the circu¬ 
lation of the blood through the lining of the 
nose which contains a considerable number 
of small blood vessels 


Nose—The blood vessels, which are profuse 
in the membrane that lines the nose, also 
supply the liquid that is necessary lor moist¬ 
ening air that is drawn into the body. With 
each breath about a pint of air is taken into 
the longs; the total in a single day is 
12,000 quarts of air which passes in or 
through the nose. 








NURSING 


NyiilTION 


ing tlie tubes leadiEg from the ears to 
the Bose» Other measures to halt 
bleeding include dosing off a blood 
vessel by pinching, cauterizing, or use 
of drugs which aid in coagulation of 
the bloods Drugs may be used to pre¬ 
vent the loss of too much blood, but 
the loss of blood from nosebleed is 
seldom serious. Nosebleed is a symp¬ 
tom, not a disease, and is an indica¬ 
tion that a nasal disturbance or other 
undesirable condition exists. See also 
sneezing; ozena. 

MURSING 5 care of the sick, 
wounded, or infirm. Good nursing in 
sickness can hasten recovery, pre¬ 
vent complications and perhaps even 
save a life. Often just keeping the 
patient as comfortable as possible and 
in good spirits is of great significance. 
During the doctor's absence, a good 
nurse carefully observes the patient 
and accurately reports to the doctor 
what she has noted. 

The nurse may help select and 
prepare the room where the patient 
will be, seeing that it is clean and 
properly ventilated, with all excess 
furniture and decorations removed. 
She will make the bed each day, and 
in between keep it smooth and tidy. 
In most cases she will wash the pa¬ 
tient once a day with warm water 
and soap, washing and drying only 
one part of the body at a time, with 
the rest covered. If the patient can¬ 
not be completely washed each day, 
Ms face and amts should be kept 
clean. The teeth and mouth should be 
cleansed several times a day. As in a 
hospital, the usual time for Ml toilet 


is in the morning, about an hour be¬ 
fore breakfast. 

The temperature of the sickroom 
should be moderate, and kept as even 
as possible. Good ventilation is essen¬ 
tial; if windows are opened, a screen 
should be used to prevent air from 
blowing directly on the patient. See 
also BED AND BEDDING; BED SOEES; 

convalescence; fever. 

NUTRITION^ the sum of the proc¬ 
esses involved in the growth, repair, 
and maintenance of the entire body. 
Persons who work in the field of 
nutrition are concerned with food 
and feeding and its relation to the 
state of the body. Nutritional sub¬ 
stances supply the energy and are the 
raw material with which the body 
performs its myriad functions and 
produces the various internal chemi¬ 
cal substances necessary to life. 

The concept of feeding is rapidly 
being revised from a standard of 
“adequacy," or one that will prevent 
deficiency diseases, such as scurvy, 
rickets, beriberi, to “optimum," that 
which will produce the highest condi¬ 
tion of well-being in the body. 

States hitherto not recognized as 
related to nutritional inadequacy are 
now attributed to it—^for example, 
capillary fragility. Deficiencies so 
slight that they do not produce re¬ 
liably observable symptoms are now 
evaluated by laboratory methods as 
nutritional deficiency states and cor¬ 
rected as such. Nutritional substances 
are being investigated and applied 
as curative agents in conditions not 
directly but often indirectly attributa¬ 
ble to nutritional deficiency, such as 


548 



NUTilTION 


NUTRITION 


cirrhosis of the liver and atherosclero- 
siSj in which the ratio of fats to other 
substances in the blood stream may 
be imbalanced. Disease^ injury^ and 
other conditions of stress may affect 
the nutritional status of the body. 
Negative nitrogen balance^ the result 
of protein depletion, calorie defi¬ 
ciency, and certain vitamin disturb¬ 
ances are known to occur in injury, 
shock, and in a number of infectious 


ailments. Several pharmaceutlcai 
companies are preparing antibiotics 
and other medications fortified with 
vitamins, notably vitamin C, signifi¬ 
cant in antibody formation and 
wound healing. 

The nutritional elements needed 
by the body may be classified in five 
essential groups: proteins, carbo¬ 
hydrates, fats, vitamins, and minerals. 
Protein foods contain the element 


£S 

3000 

2500 

3200 

1600 

f^OTEIN 

70 

60 

85 

50 

, \r 

.8 

.8 

1.4 

1.0 

IRON 

r C 

12 

12 

15 

8 

h 

V.'A'N A 

5000 

5000 

5000 

2500 

AV Bj 

1.8 

1.5 

16 

8 

lAMlN 82 

2.7 

2.2 

2.4 

1.2 

l!ACIN 

18 

15 

16 

8 

iTAMIN C 

75 

70 

90 

50 


ttfu mmm 


Nptrition-The minimym daily requirement of certain foods and nutrients is determined in 
part by age and sex. Deficiency results in disease and, in children, mafformofion or poor 
growth. On the other hand, overeating results in obesity which causes general body weak¬ 
ness and a shortened life span. 


549 



NUIiiliON 


NUTiillON 


nitrogen, an adequate amount of 
whicii is required to keep the body 
ua nitrogen balance. Unlike other 
food elements, proteins are not stored 
in the body, and a constant leplen- 
ishment is necessary to sustain health; 
if the body does not receive them, it 
win consume its own substances. 
Proteins are digested in the stomach 
by the action of the gastro juices, 
which contain hydrochloric acid, are 
changed to peptones, and reduced by 
pancreatic enzymes to amino acids 
in the smal intestines. Twenty-eight 
amino acids are known, only ten of 
which are thought to be vital to 
health. Specific amino acids, how¬ 
ever, are essential to specific proc¬ 
esses, and a deficiency in any may up¬ 
set normal functions. Protein foods 
are used by the body to rebuild pro¬ 
teins for growth, repair, and main¬ 
tenance of tissues; for production of 
hormones, enzymes, and antibodies in 
the blood; and for removing toxins. 

The metabolism of carbohydrates 
supplies energy. When large amounts 
of carbohydrates are consumed, how¬ 
ever, the body stores the part it does 
not need as fat. 

Fats provide a longer, more sus¬ 
tained supply of energy than do car¬ 
bohydrates, and have a unique initial 
lymphatic circulation. Fats, whose 
role is not completely understood, are 
thought to be indispensable to many 
chemical processes. Since the body 
can manufacture fat from carbohy¬ 
drates and, if necessary, even from 
protein, they are not considered as 
essential as other elements. Two to 
three ounces of fat in the diet each 
day is sufficient. 

Fourteen minerals are known to 


be essential to an adequate diet, and 
they are found in varying amounts 
in all varieties of food. Calcium and 
phosphorus are significant to the bony 
structure of the body, including the 
teeth. Insufficient calcium may cause 
painful tonic spasms of the muscles. 
Iodine is used by the thyroid gland 
to produce a hormone called thy¬ 
roxin, essential for the cellular use of 
oxygen. Iron combines with oxygen 
breathed in through the lungs, in 
a way not dissimilar to the combming 
of an iron object with oxygen in the 
air to form rust. Copper, cobalt, man¬ 
ganese, potassium, magnesium, cad¬ 
mium, and other minerals are in¬ 
volved in various biochemical actions, 
such as enzymes, and some are used 
for body structure. 

Vitamins, like the other elements, 
are organic compounds, substances 
which contain carbon. Unlike protein 
and the others, however, they do not 
furnish energy, but are essential for 
the transformation of energy and 
regulation of metabolism in the body. 
Without vitamins, normal growth and 
maintenance of life of men and ani¬ 
mals could not occur. Vitamins are 
sometimes called ‘^exogenous” hor¬ 
mones, hormones from outside the 
body, and certain vitamins bear a 
strong chemical resemblance to cer¬ 
tain hormones produced by the body, 
A deficiency of specific vitamins 
might cause a deficiency of specific 
hormones. In animal experiments, for 
example, a diet deficient in panto¬ 
thenic acid, a B vitamin, causes the 
adrenal glands to shrivel. Vitamin 
D bears a strong chemical resem¬ 
blance to the sex hormones. The 
body must obtain an adequate supply 


550 



nymphomania 


NYSTAGMUS 


of vitamins through food consumed, 
since it can produce little of the es¬ 
sential vitamins. Vitamin D can be 
synthesized by action of sunshine on 
tissues; vitamin A from carotene; 
and vitamin K and some of the B 
vitamins from bacteria in the intes¬ 
tines. See also meat; protein, 

NYMPHOMANIA. The excessive 
desire of a woman for sexual gratifi¬ 
cation sometimes results in a patho¬ 
logical condition known as nympho¬ 
mania, which manifests itself in an 
insatiate urge for sexual intercourse. 
Since the causes of the condition are 
emotional, psychotherapy is neces¬ 
sary. 


NYSTAGMUS, an involuntary rapid 
movement of the eyeball. The move¬ 
ments may be from side to side, up 
and down, or the eye may roll on its 
front-to-back axis. Nystagmus gen¬ 
erally affects both eyes. It is especially 
associated with disturbances of the 
nervous and brain tissues which con¬ 
trol eye movements. In miner’s 
nystagmus and in nystagmus due to 
disorders of the ear, giddiness occurs 
and objects may appear to move. It 
sometimes affects persons who work 
m poorly lighted, cramped quarters. 
Often the person is unaware of the 
movement of his eyes. In all cases 
of nystagmus an eye specialist should 
be consulted. 


55 . 




OBESITYs a condition in which fat 
is stored in the body to a grossly 
excessive degree, due to a positive 
energy balance, i.e., the body takes 
in more food than it needs to supply 
its energy requirements, storing the 
rest as fat. 

In addition to being unattractive 
and uncomfortable, obesity has long 
been recognized as a contributory 
factor in many diseases, especially 
among the aged and aging. Fat peo¬ 
ple have been generally found to be 
more susceptible to heart disturb¬ 
ances, certain types of cancer, and 
diseases of the pancreas, gallbladder 
and kidneys. Accretion of fat around 
the liver, heart, or other internal or¬ 
gans may interfere directly with their 
proper function. The mortality rale 
in surgery is higher and in general the 
life span is shorter. Obese persons 
are prone to diabetes; and medical 
“management” of the obese diabetic 
presents special problems. 

Obesity is an ailment of the pros¬ 
perous, urbanized society. In the 


United States, it has become a serious 
and growing problem, whose magni¬ 
tude was sharply pointed up in a 1966 
landmark report, Obesity and Health, 
prepared for the United States Public 
Health Service by eight independent 
experts in the fields of medicine, nu¬ 
trition, biochemistry, psychiatry and 
public health. The committee gath¬ 
ered together for the first time the 
fruits of intensified research into 
obesity which began about 20 years 
earlier when it was first recognized 
that obesity was not simply a matter 
of overeating and that weight reduc¬ 
tion consisted of something more 
than cutting down food intake. 

The general conclusions of the re¬ 
port: 

1, Obesity is now a major public 
health problem. Obesity is prevalent 
in all age groups and at all economic 
levels of American society. The prob¬ 
lem is almost certain to become more 
serious with increasing urbanization 
and automation. 

2. The conventional approach to 


552 



OBESITY 



Obesity—Chart showing rote of physical impairment among persons under or over standard 
weight. Impairment increases as weight increases. Note the graph on high blood pressure 
in the upper right corner. There is a definite rate of increase in high blood pressure associ¬ 
ated with an increase in weight. 


553 







OCCUPATIONAL DISEASES, BIOLOGICAL HAZARDS 


obesity control — dieting — is of little 
or no permanent value. Most or all 
of the weight lost by dieting is quickly 
regained. Appetite-inhibiting drugs 
and thyroid hormones, which in¬ 
crease the rate of energy consump¬ 
tion, are valueless, or nearly so. Ex¬ 
ercise is now considered the key 
factor. 

3. Only a beginning has been made 
into research on obesity. The report 
called for more objective definitions 
of obesity, for better statistics on its 
incidence and its relation to prema¬ 
ture death, and for intensive studies 
on its causes and precise biochemical 
nature. 

Because of the difficulty of perma¬ 
nently reducing weight once it has 
been gained, the report stressed pre¬ 
vention as the only practical ap¬ 
proach to the problem. To this end, 
the report called for a massive effort, 
beginning in the early primary school 
grades, to educate Americans in 
proper weight control habits — with 
the stress on exercise. 

The report’s most surpising find¬ 
ings dealt with diet and the relative 
importance of exercise and diet. It 
pointed out that the relation of diet 
to weight is not one of strict cause 
and effect. Obese children, for exam¬ 
ple, eat no more on the average—and 
in many cases less — than “normal- 
weight” children. 

Exercise, while recognized as im¬ 
portant, had long been thought to be 
relatively minor compared to diet as 
a factor in gain or loss of weight. 
This reasoning was based on the fact 
that most of the caloric energy of 
food is used in maintaining body 

554 


function, rebuilding tissues, etc., and 
a relatively small proportion is ex¬ 
pended externally. An average per¬ 
son, for example, can walk a mile 
and burn up the energy equivalent of 
a single graham cracker. 

New research indicates that physi¬ 
cal exertion has in some subtle way 
— not yet understood — a direct effect 
on metabolism. It is not merely that 
low energy expenditure overloads 
basic metabolic mechanisms thereby 
depositing excessive fat, but that it 
actually disrupts and changes the 
whole metabolic process. According 
to the report, exercise, rather than an 
attempt to consume less food, is the 
key, not only to the control of obes¬ 
ity, but also to its prevention. See also 

DIET, REDUCING. 

OCCUPATIONAL DISEASES, 
BIOLOGICAL HAZARDS* Occu¬ 
pational diseases caused by biologi¬ 
cal hazards include such infections 
as anthrax, tuberculosis, pneumonia, 
and other respiratory diseases, in¬ 
cluding the common cold. The direct 
cause of ail such disease is always 
a living infectious organism, but an 
important indirect consideration is 
the general health picture of the in¬ 
dividual worker. If he is mn down, 
or constantly exposed to changing 
temperatures, he will be much more 
predisposed to infection than if he 
is in good health. 

Anthrax offers an important ex¬ 
ample of infection incurred through 
the handling of contaminated mat¬ 
ter. Anthrax is highly infectious, 
especially among grazing animals, 



OCCUPATIONAL DISEASES, BIOLOGICAL HAZARDS 


and is easily transmitted directly or 
indirectly from the infected animal 
to man. Externally anthrax manifests 
itself in the human being as a 
malignant “boil” or swelling; in¬ 
ternally as a lung infection; or, 
more rarely, as an intestinal disease. 
The cause is a spore (bacillus 
aothracis) which reproduces rapid¬ 
ly outside living tissue. Farmers in 
direct contact with the infected ani¬ 
mals are subject to the disease, as 
are workers in industrial plants who 
contact animal products such as 
waste, hide, or hair. Vaccination has 
kept anthrax from being widespread 
among animals in the United States, 
and has prevented the disease from 
assuming major economic propor¬ 
tions in this country. For the most 
part, imported material is responsi¬ 
ble for transmitting the disease to 
our industrial workers, since much 
of our raw wool comes from Asia, 
Africa, and southern Europe, where 
anthrax is much more prevalent 
than in the United States. 

In anthrax, as in so many other 
occupational diseases, personal hy¬ 
giene on the part of the exposed 
workers is important. 

Other diseases originaiing through 
biological causes. Paratyphoid fever, 
a mild typhoid, incurred generally 
by workers in milk or shellfish in¬ 
dustries; Newcas-tle’s disease, in¬ 
curred by those working with fowl; 
trichinosis, a parasite infestation 
common among those handling pork 
products; fungus diseases such as 
sporotrichosis, a disease affecting 
the mucous membranes of the 


mouth and throat, and blastomy¬ 
cosis, lesions caused by yeastlike 
fungi, are other examples of dis¬ 
eases falling within the category of 

biological hazards. 

Brucellosis, an infectious disease 
also known as undulant fever, Malta 
fever, Mediterranean fever, and 
Gibraltar fever, is an occupational 
disease stemming from the handling 
of animal products, and occurring 
among meat packers, veterinarians, 
farmers, and livestock raisers. It is 
characterized by an acute fever with 
few or no local signs, followed by a 
chronic stage with relapses of fever, 
weakness, sweating, and vague aches 
and pains. 

The study of air bacteriology has 
played a significant part in reduc¬ 
ing occupational illness due to 
biological cause. The installation of 
ventilating systems with metering 
devices to approximate the percent¬ 
age of air contaminants, washing 
systems to minimize dust, safety 
equipment such as masks and res¬ 
pirators, are safety measures that 
must be provided under industrial 
hygiene law. Another vital factor 
contributing to the well-being of 
employees exposed to biological 
hazards is routine medical exami¬ 
nation, with special tests given to 
those workers who are exposed to 
air contaminants. But here again 
the worker must cooperate to pro¬ 
tect himself, since personal hygiene 
is a vital factor in avoiding con¬ 
tamination by most biological 
sources of infection. 

Immunization has done much to 

555 




reduce the frequency of bacterial 
infection in this country, and pub¬ 
lic health regulations have been 
adopted to prohibit the importing of 
certain materials from other coun¬ 
tries with less stringent regulations 
than ours. Nevertheless, occupa¬ 
tional bacterial infections still pre¬ 
sent a threat to the worker, al¬ 
though, in many instances, the 
infectious agents can be destroyed 
by appropriate disinfection methods. 

OCCUPATIONAL THERAPY, the 
science or art of treating injury or 
illness by work specially prescribed 
to promote rehabilitation or recov¬ 
ery. Occupational therapy is em¬ 
ployed in such diseases as chronic 
arthritis, tuberculosis, chronic heart 
disease and all forms of paralysis, 
and in any injury incapacitating to 
the body. It is needed whenever a 
person is confined to bed for an 
appreciable period of time, to avoid 
atrophy of muscles, bone or tissue. 



Occupational therapy varies ac¬ 
cording to the disease or to the part 
of the body injured. In some cases 
it may be carried on in bed, where 
leg muscles, tor example, may be 
exercised; or, if the patient can 
move around, the work may be 
done in a room where there are 
different kinds of machinery. It may 
begin with such light work as bas¬ 
ketry, weaving, braiding and draw¬ 
ing, and move on to the building of 
looms, ornaments and furniture or 
power apparatus. 

Before occupational therapy is 
undertaken, the patient’s personal 
and occupational history are studied, 
as well as his medical record. There 
may be several kinds of exercise or 
work that will help recovery from 
an injury, and often work similar 
to the patient’s former occupation 
will be prescribed. In cases where 
the damage is such that there is no 
possibility of the patient’s returning 
to his former livelihood, it may be 


556 





Occispafi©ii€il Ilieropy-Wifh fhe use of special appliances handicapped persons are able 
fo engage in various handicrafts and pursuits of interest under the guidance and encourage¬ 
ment of the occupational therapist. The accompanying photographs illustrate some of the 
many activities in occupational therapy. Much of the therapy is of a 'Ve-learning'' nature. 


necessary to direct the training to 
employment in a different field. 

Occupational therapy performs a 
double function. Not only does it 
promote recovery of the injured area 
—as working a hand loom will help 
stiff, injured fingers—but the con¬ 
structive work and interest aroused 
improve the attitude of the patient, 
essential to recovery. In cases of 
persons institutionalized for emo¬ 
tional disturbance, occupational 
therapy plays an important role in 
treatment. It offers the patient a 
constructive task; a completed piece 
of work gives him a sense of achieve¬ 
ment; it enables him to develop any 
specialized talents; and it offers a 
medium for sublimation of impulses, 
as when a patient with hostility can 
use a hammer in making a piece of 
furniture or other article. 



ODOMS. See anosmia; body odor; 

OLFACTORY SENSE; SMELL. 

OLFACTORY SENSE, the sense of 
smeB, which depends on the system 
of nerves and specialized tissue 
known as the olfactory nervous sys- 


557 




OMENTUM 


ORGASM 


tem. The olfactory nervous sys¬ 
tem begins as specialized cells in the 
lining of the upper part of the nose. 
These nerves pass up into the olfac¬ 
tory bulbs at the base of the skull. 
Nerve cells in the cortex of the brain 
complete the system, which includes 
the olfactory tracts connecting the 
cortex with the olfactory bulbs. See 

also ANOSMIA. 

OMENTUM, a large membrane 
covering the lower part of the stom¬ 
ach and hanging down in apron 
fashion over the coils of the intestine. 
It is part of the peritoneum, the mem¬ 
brane lining the interior of the ab¬ 
dominal cavity and surrounding the 
contained soft organs, and is a 
storage place for fat. The omentum 
may be involved in hernia and re¬ 
quire surgery. Certain infections, in¬ 
flammations, and tumors may affect 
the omentum which also may re¬ 
quire surgery. See also peritonitis. 

ONYCHIA, inflammation of the 
matrix of the nail, resulting in the 
loss of the nail. See also nails. 

OPHTHALMIA, severe inflamma¬ 
tion of the eye, especially the con¬ 
junctiva, the mucous membrane 
covering the anterior part of the 
globe of the eye. See also conjunc¬ 
tivitis; eye; pinkeye. 

OPHTHALMOSCOPE, an instru¬ 
ment for examining the interior of 
the eye, invented in Berlin in 1851 
by the famous German physicist, 
Hermann von Helmholtz. It consists 
of a mirror mounted on a handle. By 
means of an electric bulb light is 


thrown into the eye and the ophthal¬ 
mologist is able to examine the eye 
through an opening in the center of 
the mirror. See also eye. 

OPTIC NERVE, the second cranial 
nerve connecting the retina of the 
eye with the brain. It conducts the 
sensory impulses of sight. See also 
eye. 

ORCHITIS, inflammation of the 
testicles, the sex glands of the male 
(the prefix “orchi-” refers to the tes¬ 
ticle) . The condition is characterized 
by swelling, pain, and a sensation of 
heaviness in these organs. Various 
infectious organisms, including those 
of gonorrhea, syphilis, or tubercu¬ 
losis, may cause orchitis. In many 
cases of mumps, in young men from 
fifteen to twenty-five years of age, 
the infection spreads to the testicles. 
The incidence may be reduced by 
intramuscular administration of 
mumps serum, if it is given within 
thirty-six hours. When orchitis is a 
complication of gonorrhea, treatment 
is determined in each case by the 
specific cause. Drugs relieve the pain, 
and sometimes cortisone and anti¬ 
biotics are also recommended. Sur¬ 
gery may be imperative. 

ORGASM, the climax of sexual ex¬ 
citement, during which the sense of 
pleasure is at its height. It is followed 
by a period of relaxation and a feel¬ 
ing of fulfillment. In the normal male, 
ejaculation of semen accompanies 
an orgasm. In the female, orgasm, 
and ejaculation of fluid may or may 
not take place in intercourse during 


558 



ORINASE 


OSTEITIS 


the early period of raarriage. How¬ 
ever, with experience this inability 
to come to climax may be overcome, 
being largely due, in many cases, to 
mental causes rather than physical. 
See also impotence. 

ORINASE, a new drug to be taken 
by mouth by persons with diabetes 
mellitus. This product has been tested 
in many thousands of cases, and has 
been effective in reducing blood sugar 
and the presence of sugar in the 
urine. Furthermore, Orinase has been 
found helpful in curbing the passage 
of excessive amounts of urine, and 
excessive appetite, and it also eradi¬ 
cates itching. 

This drug cannot be used as a 
substitute for insulin in every case of 
diabetes mellitus, and is most likely 
to aid those in whom the diabetes is 
relatively mild and stable, and in 
whom onset took place some time 
after the age of thirty. Care must be 
used in determining which diabetics 
can be transferred from insulin to 
Orinase. The drug should not be 
given to children with diabetes, or to 
those who have diabetes complicated 
by acidosis, coma, infection, fever, or 
gangrene, to diabetics whose nerve or 
thyroid function is impaired, or when 
surgical procedures are contemplated. 

Special care should be taken in 
the management of persons who are 
being transferred from insulin to 
Orinase to make sure that the urine 
is tested for sugar at least three times 
daily during the period in which 
Orinase is being substituted for in¬ 
sulin. Symptoms which may appear in 


the transition period include hunger, 
nervousness, sweating, paleness alter¬ 
nating with flushing of the face and 
dizziness. 

Other reactions, none of them too 
serious, may be gastrointestinal upset, 
headache, skin allergy, and intoler¬ 
ance to alcohol. In such cases, the 
dosage must be reduced in size and 
made more frequent. See also diabe¬ 
tes; INSULIN. 

ORTHODONTIA, the branch of 
dentistry concerned with malocclu¬ 
sion, or deviation from normal align¬ 
ment of the teeth. The purpose of 
orthodontia is not only to improve the 
appearance of the person; by properly 
adjusting the placement of the teeth 
the general efficiency and health of 
teeth and gums is improved and fu¬ 
ture trouble caused by misaligned 
teeth is avoided. 

The orthodontist first makes a 
complete x-ray examination of the 
mouth, takes measurements and 
makes a cast of the teeth and gums. 
He then places braces, or frames, 
made of wire and gold on the teeth 
and the often lengthy process of re¬ 
directing the growth of the teeth has 
begun. After this, the braces are 
frequently manipulated, moved and 
changed by the orthodontist. The 
whole process sometimes takes sev¬ 
eral years. 

OSTEITIS, or ostitis, inflammation 
of the bone. In common practice, 
osteifc refers to inflammation of the 
dense shafts of long bones, the spongy 
portion of the ends of the long bones, 
or the tissue of the short or flat bones. 

Tuberculosis is a common cause 


559 



OSTiOAiTHiiTIS 


OSTEOAiTHilTlS 


of osteitis, bet it may also be pro¬ 
duced by various organisms, sucb as 
the staphylococci. Some degree of 
osteitis will also be found in such 
bone disorders as osteomyelitis. 

Paget's disease, also known as oste¬ 
itis deformans, begins in the bone 
marrow, spreads to other portions of 
the long bones, and also affects the 
skull. The sacrum, pelvis, and lower 
extremities ard also involved. The 
long bones lengthen and thicken, 
often becoming twice their normal 
size. At the same time, they soften 
and become bowed where weight is 
placed on them. The skull grows pro¬ 
gressively larger. 

Outside of neuralgic pains and 
headache, the health of the person 
is unaffected. The disease generally 
occurs between the ages of forty and 
sixty, and is rarely fatal. However, 
other complications such as spontane¬ 
ous fracture, secondary anemia, and 
bone sarcoma may cause death. 
Pagef s disease is of unknown origin, 
and no positive treatment for it has 
as yet been found. 

OSTEOARTHMITIS, The most 
common form of arthritis is osteo¬ 
arthritis, also called degenerative 
joint disease. The latter name is 
especially appropriate because this 
form of arthritis which appears with 
advancing years, is not primarily an 
inflammatory process as are most 
of the others but is due to degenera¬ 
tive changes in the cartilaginous 
portions of joints and in bones. As 
in the case of hardening of the 
arteries and graying of the hair, not 
all the factors which enter into its 


cause are known. Clearly, however, 
an important factor is wear and 
tear. Hence it is more apt to appear 
in weight-bearing joints of persons 
who are overweight, or in joints 
which have been damaged by some 
other form of arthritis, injuries or 
congenital defects. Everyone gets 
this type of joint damage if he lives 
long enough, and it is usually more 
of a nuisance than a crippling dis¬ 
ease. In some instances, however, 
especially when the hips are in¬ 
volved, it can cause considerable 
pain and crippling. 

A special form of osteoarthritis 
particularly common in women past 
forty years of age affects the termi¬ 
nal joints of the fingers. It causes 
small lumps to appear at each side 
of these joints on the back of the 
fingers. These lumps are called 
Heberden’s nodes, after the English 
physician who described them many 
years ago. They sometimes are 
slightly painful when they first ap¬ 
pear, but the pain does not last and, 
aside from their appearance, they 
are of small consequence. 

Currently treatment is far from 
perfect. Aspirin will help the aches 
and pains, and for rare cases with 
really disabling pain and stiffness 
there are a number of surgical pro¬ 
cedures for reconstruction of dam¬ 
aged joints. Cortisone and related 
hormones seldom are valuable in 
treating osteoarthritis when given 
by mouth; but if secondary inflam¬ 
matory changes are present, injec¬ 
tion of hydrocortisone into the joint 
may result in relief for a time. Valu- 


560 



OSTEOMYELITIS 


OTITIS 


able measures which may prevent 
this type of joint disease include: 
avoiding obesity and protecting 
joints from undue wear and tear. 
The patient can also help prevent 
progression of the changes by faith¬ 
fully performing exercises prescribed 
by his physician. These exercises 
give injured joints greater stability. 
See also arthritis. 

OSTEOMYELITIS. Certain pus- 
forming germs, and sometimes those 
of tuberculosis, pneumonia, or ty¬ 
phoid fever, produce infection in the 
bones which is known as osteomye¬ 
litis. Though the germs may enter 
from infected tissues close to the 
bone, usually they are carried by the 
blood stream. 

Osteomyelitis may appear in any 
bone of the body, but is more com¬ 
mon in the leg and arm bones. The 
greatest danger arises when this in¬ 
fection attacks the jawbone. 

Osteomyelitis in its early stages 
often gives an inflamed and swollen 
appearance at the point of infection, 
and a blood test will reveal an in¬ 
crease in the number of white blood 
cells. Fever and rapid pulse axe also 
present, pain is felt in the bone, and 
sensitivity in the diseased area is 
likely to be great. 

Since the blood stream is involved, 
this infection can be carried through¬ 
out the body and may travel from 
bone to bone. Fortunately prompt 
diagnosis is now possible with x-ray 
so that treatment can be started be¬ 
fore multiple osteomyelitis, infection 
of several bones, develops. Moreover, 


the modem sulfa and penicillin drugs 
will actually penetrate to a deep 
infection of the bone. The dramatic 
success of penicillin in treating osteo¬ 
myelitis of the jawbone helped to 
bring this drug to immediate general 
attention. Surgery of the bone is still 
required so that the infected material 
can be removed. Only then can the 
doctor apply the drugs to the infec¬ 
tion within the bone. 

OSTEOPATHY, a system of treat¬ 
ment of disease by manipulation of 
bones, joints, and other body tissues. 
It is based on the theory that the body 
is a mechanical organism whose struc¬ 
tures and functions are coordinate 
and interdependent and that a dis¬ 
turbance of either constitutes disease. 
The theory also holds that when the 
stmcture of the body mechanism is 
normal, environmental conditions 
favorable, and nutrition adequate, 
the body is capable of making its 
own remedies against disease and 
other toxic states. 

Osteopathy places chief emphasis 
on body manipulation, although it 
sometimes also includes generally ac¬ 
cepted medical and surgical methods 
of diagnosis and treatment. In many 
states osteopaths are limited by law to 
treating patients only by manipulative 
methods, but m some states they may 
also undertake surgical procedures 
and prescribe medicine. 

OTETIS, inflammation of the ear 
which can involve the outer ear, the 
passage to the drum and the outer 
surface of the eardrum itself, and the 
middle ear. Rarely is the innermost 
ear affected in this type of inflamma- 


561 



OTOSCLEROSIS 


OTOSCLEROSIS 


tion. Otitis can be acute or chronic. 

In otitis of the external ear, the 
skin is inflamed and may produce a 
discharge that apparently comes from 
inside the eardrum. However, the 
drum is not perforated, and only the 
skin of the outer ear is involved. 
Application of antiseptics and system¬ 
atic and thorough cleansing is the 
usual treatment, and most cases re¬ 
spond fairly rapidly after treatment is 
begun. 

In otitis media, or inflammation of 
the middle ear, suppuration usually 
occurs and the condition is commonly 
referred to as running ear. It develops 
from acute infection of the upper 
respiratory tract and enters the ear 
passages by way of the Eustachian 
tube. Generally it follows a head cold 
or sore throat, especially if neglected. 
In children, adenoids are often a 
factor in recurrent cases of running 
ear; and measles, diptheria, and 
scarlet fever also frequently cause 
otitis in the middle ear. In adults, 
sinus trouble may sometimes be in¬ 
volved as well. 

The usual symptoms of acute otitis 
media are earache, fever, headache, 
pain, and deafness. Upon examina¬ 
tion the eardrum is red and it loses its 
normal shape and luster. 

In the early stages of treatment the 
patient should be put to bed. If the 
pain does not subside within a few 
hours, the doctor will probably pre¬ 
scribe aspirin or codeine to relieve the 
distress. The application of heat is 
also helpful. 

In treatment of otitis in its acute 
form, the use of antibiotics has suc¬ 


cessfully replaced many other forms 
of treatment. However, surgical in¬ 
cision of the eardrum and drainage 
of the ear is still the most effective 
method of relieving pressure. In many 
cases a combination of surgery and 
drainage, followed by the use of anti¬ 
biotics, is most effective. However, 
sensitivity tests must be made for 
each patient’s reaction to antibiotic 
treatment. In numerous instances it 
may be found best to drain the ear 
and keep it clean, allowing nature to 
take its course without the use of 
drugs. 

Even without treatment, a mild 
attack will subside. But in other cases, 
especially if treatment has been 
neglected or the ear improperly 
cleansed, a state of chronic otitis 
media may be established. There is 
danger of acute mastoiditis, and con¬ 
stant or recurrent discharge may 
provoke a gradual impairment of 
the hearing. 

Chronic otitis is classified as serous 
or suppurative, depending on whether 
or not there is pus formation. The 
source of the infection must be 
located by the doctor, and treatment 
is essential since there is always a 
serious threat of acute inflammation 
as well as gradual destruction of the 
hearing. It is therefore advisable to 
seek treatment promptly in case of 
earache or running ear. See also 
deafness; eae; mastoid. 

OTOSCLEROSIS, a chronic disorder 
of the ear in which spongy bone 
forms in the capsule of the labyrinth 
of the ear and the small bones lose 
their power to conduct sound. The 


562 



OVAiiES 


OVARIES 


exact cause of otosclerosis is un- 
known. Tests have been made to de¬ 
termine whether or not it is heredi- 
tary^ due to vitamin deficiency or to 
failure of glandular function, but 
none of these has been conclusive 
enough to establish the underlying 
cause. 

Otosclerosis affects women more 
often than men. Frequently the first 
sign is an annoying ringing in the 
ears, and a gradual and progressive 
loss of hearing. It may affect only one 
ear at first, but eventually both ears 
become involved. Sometimes enough 
hearing is retained for the person to 
follow ordinary conversation, but in 
other cases it is necessary for him 
to use a hearing aid or learn to lip 
read. 

Gradual loss of hearing is an al¬ 
most certain indication of otosclero¬ 
sis, but tests have been developed by 
ear specialists to confirm the diagno¬ 
sis and to make sure that other factors 
that may affect hearing are not in¬ 
volved. 

Various types of treatments are 
used in otosclerosis, including care¬ 
ful control of diet, vitamin supple¬ 
ments, drugs to allay the ringing sen¬ 
sation, glandular extracts to correct 
glandular failure, and surgical pro¬ 
cedures. The most positive treatment 
is the Lempert operation in which a 
window is drilled from the outer 
healthy bony structure into the inner 
ear. Fenestration, as this method of 
surgery is called, has been successful 
wholly or partially in a great number 
of cases, but is usually only possible 
when the nerves are unimpaired. 


Another operation restores movement 
to the stapes, one of the three smal 
bones which make contact with the 
eardram. See also deafness; eae, 

OVAMIESj the two sex glands of 
women. They lie in the lower part of 
the abdomen and perform two es¬ 
sential functions: they germinate the 
female reproductive or egg cells, one 
of which passes through the Fallopian 
tube to the uterus every month; and 
they provide internal secretions or 
hormones which influence most femi¬ 
nine physical characteristics and 
which are related to the reproductive 
process. 

The hormone estradiol determines 
the familiar feminine attributes; it 
causes both external and internal 
sex organs to grow to adult size and 
the development of the typical figure 
with lines softened by a layer of fat 
under the skin. Estradiol also appears 
significant to the development of 
more mature attitudes and concerns 
in the young girl. 

The other hormone secreted by the 
ovaries, progesterone, cause changes 
in the uterus and prepares it to 
receive the fertilized egg ceH. Pro¬ 
gesterone is secreted approximately 
for only a week, or a little more, 
each month after the egg cell has 
been released by the ovary. 

The female phenomenon, meno¬ 
pause or change of life, is bound 
intimately with the discontinuance of 
these hormones. When ova are no 
longer released each month proges¬ 
terone is no longer developed. Gradu¬ 
ally the estradiol diminishes and 
finally ceases. Estradiol normally is 


563 



OVULATION 


OXYGEN 


produced from the second until 
approximately the fifth decade. En¬ 
docrine disorders can cause changes 
in younger women similar to those of 
menopause. 

Removal of the ovaries because of 
infection or for some other reason re¬ 
sults in the termination of the hor¬ 
mones and causes definite bodily 
changes regardless of age. One of the 
great advances in medicine has been 
the discovery of the exact chemical 
character of the hormones and the 
method of extracting them from 
natural substances or of manufactur¬ 
ing them artificially. Now these are 
substituted for those hormones lost. 
The removal of one, or part of one 
ovary has no such effects. 

One of the principal disorders of 
the ovary is the formation of cysts, 
sacs which contain liquid material of 
glandular origin of various kinds 
which may grow to considerable size. 
If the cyst remains small, difficulty 
may not ensue, but if it enlarges it 
must be removed surgically. 

The ovaries may be affected by 
growth other than cysts, such as 
tumors and cancers. Since the phy¬ 
sician cannot ascertain the exact 
nature of such a growth by external 
examination, an operation is usually 
necessary in order to determine the 
type of growth involved and the 
proper course to be pursued. 

Infection may reach the ovaries 
through the Fallopian tubes, the pas¬ 
sages which each month ordinarily 
carry the egg cell into the uterus. 
Gonorrhea, streptococcal and tuber¬ 
cular infections are common. Fever 
and pain as well as swelling may be 


relieved quickly by application of heat 
or cold, with a hot-water bottle, heat¬ 
ing pad, or ice pack. Sulfa and anti¬ 
biotic drugs used under the doctor’s 
direction usually are effective. How¬ 
ever, the infection may not respond to 
treatment and the removal of the 
ovary or the Fallopian tube by sur¬ 
gery may be necessary. 

Another ovarian disorder is caused 
by strain, stretching, and twisting of 
the tissues which fasten the ovary to 
the abdominal wall. The affected 
ovary may stop functioning tempo¬ 
rarily and as a result its blood supply 
may be interrupted or the ovarian 
ligaments themselves, as they are 
called, may be involved. Surgery is 
sometimes required to correct this 
condition. 

OVULATION, the process in which 
the egg or ovum is released from the 
Graafian follicle of the ovary. In the 
sexually mature female, ovulation oc¬ 
curs every twenty-eight days. This 
cycle ordinarily produces only one 
egg at a time; infrequently it pro¬ 
duces two or more eggs which can 
result in multiple birth. Following 
ovulation the egg enters the Fallopian 
tube where fertilization by the male 
sperm takes place following inter¬ 
course. If fertilization does not occur, 
the egg undergoes degeneration and 
a new cycle begins. Failure to ovu¬ 
late results in sterility. See also con¬ 
traception; menstruation; ova¬ 
ries; STERILITY. 

OXYGEN, a colorless, odorless, gas¬ 
eous element which constitutes about 
one-fifth of the volume of the atmos¬ 
phere. Formerly used by physicians 


564 



OZEMA 


OZENA 


3iiiy in life-and-deatli emergencies, 
today oxygen is used frequently in 
iiie treatment of many diseases. 

Among modem mechanisms em¬ 
ployed are the incubators for pre¬ 
mature infants as well as oxygen 
rooms and oxygen tents. Many of 
these devices involve the danger of 
fire and explosions unless they are 
supervised by experts. 

Generally speaking, oxygen is pre¬ 
scribed for al patients who either 
cannot breathe easily, or who, for 
some reason, are suffering from a 
limited supply of air. Such a need 
arises, for example, in pneumonia or 
carbon monoxide poisoning. 

Oxygen is not often administered 
for diseases of the heart because the 
shortage of air which occurs in con¬ 
nection with these afflictions is usuaUy 
due to a diminished circulation of the 
blood. An exception, however, is 
angina pectoris in which an oxygen 
deficiency occurs in the heart muscle. 
If attacks occur often, unexpectedly 
and with slight provocation, oxygen 
can be of great value. 

OZiNA, or atrophic rhinitis, a dis¬ 
ease affecting the mucous membrane 
of the nose and characterized by an 


extremely offensive odor. A gradual 
degeneration of the nasal membrane 
is followed by discharge of matter 
and formation of large foui-smeling 
crusts. The sense of smell is affected 
so that the person himself is unaware 
of the odor coming from the nose. 
The interior of the nose is dry and the 
internal structure so affected as to 
make the airway through the nose 
unusually wide. Continuous coughing 
and hacking to clear the passages of 
the crusts which get into the throat 
also occur. 

Treatment formerly included fre¬ 
quent s 5 U‘mgmg of the nasal passages 
with alkaline and antiseptic solutions. 
Now attention to diet and tests to 
determine the glandular condition 
and general health are part of the 
treatment. Surgical procedures which 
were helpful in the past are now 
usually replaced by more effective 
hygienic measures. 

Ozena, which was once quite com¬ 
mon, especially among young girls, 
has largely disappeared. However, 
ozena may affect children in whom an 
early nasal infection has gone un¬ 
treated and atrophy of the nasal 
membrane followed by symptoms of 
ozena may result from negligence. 


565 




FACETS DISEASE. Two separate 
and distinct disorders are named 
Pagefs disease. Sir James Paget, a 
famous Britisii surgeon, first de¬ 
scribed them in 187L One of the 
disorders is osteitis deformans, a 
disease of the bones, which is dis¬ 
cussed under osteitis, an^ the other 
is Pagefs disease of the nipple. 

Paget’s disease of the nipple is a 
cancer of the breast. It generally 
affects only one breast and is mani¬ 
fested by redness and dryness of the 
nipple, cracks and ulceration. The 
nipple is usually tender and fre¬ 
quently there is an abnormal dis¬ 
charge. Cancer of the breast is ordi¬ 
narily detected a year or two after 
the nipple is affected, which in most 
cases is considered an early warning 
sign. See also breast; cancer; 
OSTEITIS. 

PAINj a disturbed sensation, causing 
suffering or distress. Pain is produced 
by irritation of the trunk, root, or 
termini of a sensory nerve. Nerve 


endings in the skin are also sensitive 
to touch, heat, and cold as well as 
pain. Pain may be considered a pro¬ 
tective mechanism in that it directs 
attention to some disturbance in the 
body. 

Pain varies with the cause and 
among different people, some persons 
being more sensitive to it than others. 
Pain may be described as boring, 
gnawing, cutting, burning, throbbing, 
and in other ways. The description 
of the type of pain often helps to 
determine its cause—^for example, a 
throbbing pain is associated with 
suppuration. The situation or point 
of origin is an even better indication 
of its cause. However, the area of 
the pain may be misleading, as in 
the case of a referred pain in the 
temple resulting from a bad tooth, or 
a pain in the back of the shoulder 
caused by irritation of the liver. The 
system whereby pain originates in 
the nerve endings and is channeled 
into the spinal cord and up into the 
brain may also cause pain to be felt 



PALATE 


PANCREAS 


in tissue that has been removed—as, 
for example, a pain in a leg which 
has been amputated. 

Pain which is entirely mental in 
origin is called psychogenic pain. 
Frequently it is vague and irregular 
and the person often exaggerates in 
describing it. The pain usually dis¬ 
appears when the mental cause has 
been erased. 

Much study and research has been 
devoted to pain and the effects of 
various drags and techniques in re¬ 




lieving it. For example, in surgical 
operation pain is relieved by blocking 
or cutting various nerves. It is dimin¬ 
ished or blocked chemically by the 
use of paie-kllling drags. See also 
ACUTE ILLNESS, ACUTE PAIN. 

PALATEj, the roof of the mouth. It 
is composed of the hard palate and a 
soft palate. See also cleft palate. 

PALSY* See paralysis agitans. 

FANCREAS» one of the vital organs 
of the body, ranking in importance 
with the liver. It is situated in the ab¬ 
dominal region, behind the stomach, 
close to the liver and gallbladder with 
which it shares a common duct lead¬ 
ing into the duodenum, the first part 
of the small intestine. The pancreas is 
about six inches long, yellowish in 
color, soft, with a head, body, and 
tail. 

The pancreas performs two distinct 
functions. The first is to secrete the 
pancreatic juice into the intestinal 
tract. This fluid is one of the chief 
chemical aids in digestion, contain¬ 
ing certain enzymes essential in the 
digestion of starch, proteins, and fats. 
The pancreas also acts as an endo¬ 
crine gland, secreting msulin directly 
into the blood stream. Insulin is 
valuable in the regulation of blood 
sugar levels and in the conversion of 
sugar into heat and energy. 

Pcsiii—The drawings show some oreas where 
pains referred from ofher tissyes are leif. 
Fain moy develop In a part of fhe body fayf 
the cause of that pain may be situated in 
another area. A well-known example of re¬ 
ferred pain is the pain which arises in the 
heart and is referred to the neck and the 
left arm (angina pectoris). 


567 



PAMCREAS 


PANCREAS 


Insulin is produced by tlie part of 
the pancreas known as the Islets of 
Langerhans, groups of specialized 
cells found scattered throughout the 
organ. A disorder of the pancreas 
which cuts down the production of 
inRiilin results in the disease known 
as diabetes mellitus. Tumors may also 
develop in the Islets of Langerhans 
and cause an overproduction of in¬ 
sulin. This combined with an in¬ 
sufficiency of blood sugar gives the 
symptoms of an overdose of insulin 
and may include coma, convulsions, 
or periodic attacks of fatigue and 
shortness of breath. Surgery to re¬ 
move these tumors is the most effec¬ 
tive method of controlling the condi¬ 
tion. 

The pancreas may be affected by 
infection of the gallbladder, the bile 
duct, or stomach, and jaundice may 
result from such inflammation. If 
cancer is involved, it may also pro¬ 
duce jaundice. 

Acute damage of the pancreas 
may occur from direct invasion of the 
organ by bacteria, or by blockage of 
the pancreatic duct resulting in the 
retention of powerful digestive fer¬ 
ments. Violent symptoms may de¬ 
velop suddenly in the abdomen, 
mcleding severe pain, vomiting, 
hemorrhage, paleness, and shock, 

WMle surgery was once the first 
step in treating acute pancreatic 
infection, current management re¬ 
sembles that practiced in other hem¬ 
orrhagic acute gastrointestinal disor¬ 
ders, The patient is put to bed and 
Hood transfusions are given. Intra¬ 
venous feeding is begun and con¬ 
tinued until the acute stage is passed. 


Surgery is avoided in this stage, and 
pancreatic secretions are inhibited by 
nasal suction from the stomach. 
Drugs to relieve pain are given, and 
in some cases blockage of the nerves 
is effected. When the condition war¬ 
rants, the patient is placed on a 
bland diet, as in cases of duodenal ul¬ 
cer. 

In most instances careful treatment 
results in complete recovery, but pa¬ 
tients should be examined within six 
weeks thereafter to make certain that 
complications, such as biliary disease 
or pancreatic cysts, are not present. 
In some cases, however, there may 
be recurrence of the acute symptoms, 
or development of chronic pancre¬ 
atitis. In the chronic form, the pan¬ 
creas is so affected as to cause perma¬ 
nent damage to the insulin-producing 
cells, and there may be a develop¬ 
ment of fibrous tissue which gradually 
blocks off the production of pancre¬ 
atic juice. Treatment may include 
administering pancreatic extracts to 
make up the deficiency of digestive 
fluid and insulin to control diabetes. 
Occasionally surgery is desirable to 
remove cysts which develop. When 
great pain is present and does not re¬ 
spond to direct surgery, the splanch¬ 
nic nerves leading to the pancreas 
may be cut. 

Cancer of the pancreas usually 
affects middle-aged or elderly men, 
and is only one-third as frequent in 
women. It is generally accompanied 
by severe deep pain in the back be¬ 
tween the shoulder blades. Whether 
or not it begins in the head, body, or 
tail of the pancreas, surgery of the 
entire organ is indicated when cancer 


568 



PARALYSIS 


PARALYSIS 


is detected. Such an operation is now 
possible^ with the means developed 
for controlling shock and the availa¬ 
bility of substitutes for the secretions 
of the pancreas. See also diabetes; 
insulin; jaundice, 

PARALYSIS^ temporary or perma¬ 
nent loss of muscle function, sensa¬ 
tion, or voluntary motion, usually 
caused by injury to nerves or de¬ 
struction of nerve cells which control 
the function of the affected muscles 
or muscle tissue. An example of 
paralysis is the cutting of a motor 
nerve, as may happen in injury to the 
wrist or forearm. The muscles sup¬ 
plied by the nerve cease to function 
and begin to degenerate. Unless the 
cut ends are successfully joined to¬ 
gether by surgery and unless nerve 
fibers grow into the old nerve trunk, 
these muscles will be permanently in¬ 
active. 

Damage to nerve cells or fibers 
may be caused by disease, pressure, or 
destructive injury to the brain or 
spinal cord, any of which may pro¬ 
duce partial or total paralysis of sev¬ 
eral muscles. Paralysis due to brain 
damage is most likely to be a stiff 
or spastic type, and paralysis due to 
damage to the cells in the spinal cord 
is generally a limp flaccid kind. 

Specific terms are used to describe 
various types of paralysis. Paralysis 
of both arms and both legs is called 
quadriplegia. Paralysis of one side 
of the body is hemiplegia. Diplegia is 
paralysis of similar parts on each side 
of the body. Monoplegia is paralysis 
of a single arm or leg or a single 
muscle or group of muscles, such as 


those on one side of the face. Paraly¬ 
sis of both legs is paraplegia. 

As well as being caused by injury 
to the brain, spinal cord, or nerves, 
paralysis can be brought about by 
embolism, thrombosis, or brain hem¬ 
orrhage, known as apoplexy or 
stroke. Tumors and various progres¬ 
sive diseases and degenerations can 
affect the spinal cord and produce 
various types of “creeping paralysis.” 
Various forms of neuritis affect the 
muscle through the nerves and cause 
a temporary paralysis. Paralysis 
which is mental in origin occasionaly 
occurs, as in hysteria. 

To treat paralysis, both nerves and 
muscles must be considered. In pa¬ 
ralysis from strokes, poliomyelitis, 
and neuritis, the tendency for re¬ 
covery or improvement is strong once 
the underlying disease or condition 
has run its course. Paralysis due to 
pressure on a nerve tends to disappear 
if pressure is removed before the 
nerve cells or fibers are completely 
destroyed. Treatment involves treat¬ 
ing the nerve or tissue causing pres¬ 
sure on the nerve as well as treating 
the muscles that have been affected. 

Muscles that have been paralyzed 
are protected until nerve impulses 
once again reach them. Of utmost 
importance is preventing the para¬ 
lyzed muscles from being stretched 
by the pull of healthy opposing mus¬ 
cles. This is most frequently done by 
immobilization in splints or braces. 
Paralyzed muscles must also be kept 
warm and tone maintained by gentle 
massage, increasing in vigor as the 
muscle improves. Rehabilitation of 
paralyzed patients requires much spe- 


569 



PARALYSIS AGITANS 


PARANOIA 


cial training and long hours of tcdi“ 
oes work. See aka apoplexy; cere¬ 
bral palsy; paraplegia; polio¬ 
myelitis; STROKE. 

FAMAI.YSIS AGITANS, a disease 
distinguished by muscular weakness 
and trembliiig of parts of the body at 
rest. Dr. James Parkinson of London 
described it in 1817. Scientifically the 
condition is known as paralysis 
agitanSj and it is also called Parkin¬ 
son’s disease or shaking palsy. The 
disorder is typically one of elderly 
people^ striking mostly persons in 
their sixties and seventies. On rare 
occasions brain inflammation, such as 
encephalitis, may cause a similar dis¬ 
turbance. 

Paralysis agitans ordinarily affects 
jBrst a single arm or leg, then the 
second limb on the same side, and 
finally those on the other side. Often 
an arm first betrays symptoms by los¬ 
ing the t 3 ^ical swing that accom¬ 
panies walking, and the face begins 
to lack its customary expressiveness 
and changes slowly or not at all with 
passing moods. Involvement of the 
limbs is followed by that of the 
trunk muscles, which gives the body 
a stooping posture. Steps become 
shorter and more rapid and develop 
into a combination of a shuffle and 
run. The rate at which the disease ad¬ 
vances varies in different persons. Of¬ 
ten it progresses slowly, leaving the 
health good in other respects. In¬ 
tervals as long as a year may occur 
between the phases of development 
from one limb to another. 

Changes in the brain, in other 
nerve tissue, and in blood vessels of 


the brain have been observed in asso¬ 
ciation with paralysis agitans. Al¬ 
though exact knowledge as to its 
cause is not known, special or direct 
relationship to either brain hemor¬ 
rhage or high blood pressure is doubt¬ 
ful. 

Treatment of paralysis agitans is 
usually limited to relief of symptoms, 
to efforts to keep the patient com¬ 
fortable, to maintaining his general 
health and thus to endeavoring to 
retard the progress of the disease. 

Drags of the belladonna type re¬ 
duce rigidity; they may be admin¬ 
istered in various ways to give relief. 
Baths and massage relieve the ten¬ 
sions in the muscles and are soothing 
to the skin. 

Operative procedures have been 
developed which diminish the circu¬ 
lation of blood to the areas in the 
brain concerned with the tremors. 
Success has been reported in many 
cases of paralysis agitans. 

PARANOIA, a rare psychosis char¬ 
acterized by delusions of persecution 
and often haHucinations, usually of 
an auditory type. Contact with reality 
is still maintained, but it is distorted. 
The paranoid person feels that a 
person or group is persecuting Mm, 
perhaps trying to kill Mm. Often tMs 
intense fear and suspicion is com¬ 
bined with excessive but unrealized 
ambitions and delusions of grandeur. 
The paranoid person blames the “^per- 
secutori’ for Ms failure. In the true 
type of paranoia, one tMng becomes 
the ‘"persecutor,” rather than the per¬ 
son being suspicious of everything, 
and this thing dominates the person’s 
life. 


570 



PARAPLEGIA 


PAiATHYROID GLANDS 


PARAPLEGIA^ paralysis of the 
lower limbSj, due to severe injury to 
the spine or spinal cord. It may re¬ 
sult from a severe blow to the spinal 
cords, fracture or dislocation of the 
spinal coiujnn, or from bullet or 
knife wounds. 

Surgery may be required to cor¬ 
rect damage to the injured area or to 
remove bone or metallic fragments. 
In some cases an operation may not 
be indicated or practical at the time 
of injury. 

Whether or not an operation is 
performed, a long period of hospital 
care is essential following injury to 
the spine resulting in paraplegia. Ex¬ 
perience in World War II, which 
produced thousands of disabled vet¬ 
erans, proved the significance of su¬ 
pervision and patient nursing in the 
ultimate rehabilitation of a great 
number of paraplegics. 

In the early phase of treatment 
meticulous attention is given to main¬ 
tenance of healthy bone structure, 
care of the skin, proper drainage of 
the urinary tract, bowel activity, and 
diet. Once partial recovery is at¬ 
tained long-term care of the patient 
is paramount. The patient must be 
helped through the trying period of 
adjustment to his disability. Skill¬ 
ful physiotherapy and occupational 
therapy and sometimes psycho¬ 
therapy play a considerable part in 
rehabilitation. Much has been ac¬ 
complished in preparing paraplegics 
for useful occupations. They have 
been taught to walk with braces and 
to drive specially equipped automo¬ 
biles. Many have married, established 
homes, obtained employment, and 


taken their places as useful, self- 
sufficient citizens. See also paralysis. 

PARATHYROID GLANDS, the 
four small glandular bodies attached 
to the back of the th3/roid gland in 
the neck, two lying on each side. To¬ 
gether they are about the size of a 
small bean and are the smallest glands 
of internal secretion. 

The function of their secretion or 
hormone is to regulate the use of 
calcium and phosphorus in the body. 
When the glands are underactive and 
the quantity of the secretion deficient, 
the amount of calcium in the blood 
drops and the amount of phos¬ 
phorus increases, eventually produc¬ 
ing tetany, a spontaneous muscle 
spasm. Overactivity of the glands 
results in withdrawal of too much 
calcium and phosphorus from the 
bones, rendering them soft and 
fragile. 

When tetany occurs as a result of 
underaction of the parathyroids, the 
muscles have a tendency to go into 
painful prolonged spasms; tingling, 
numbness, and sometimes twitching 
may accompany the spasm. The fore¬ 
arms and hands are most often af¬ 
fected; the throat is the most trouble¬ 
some part. The muscles eventually 
become abnormaUy sensitive to 
stimuli. People with tetany frequently 
are subject to nervousness and emo¬ 
tional depression. Tetany often re¬ 
sults from inadvertent removal of the 
parathyroid glands, which are so 
small that they can be unknowingly 
removed or destroyed during a surgi¬ 
cal operation on the th 3 n:oid gland. 

The symptoms of tetany may arise 


571 



PAiESiS 


PAiESIS 


from causes other than parathyroid 
deficiency, but are afi characterized 
by inadequacy of the supply of cal¬ 
cium received from food. Similar 
symptoms may come from too much 
alkali. 

In the past, treatment of tetany was 
difficult, but today the calcium de¬ 
ficiency can be remedied in various 
ways—^for example, by regulating the 
diet to keep the phosphorus intake 
low which requires a reduction of 
meat, egg yolk, and dairy products. 
Before treatment can successfully be 
planned, the condition of the blood 
must be determined and the specific 
factors producing the s 3 miptoms iso¬ 
lated. Diet control alone is sometimes 
sufficient to restore normal function. 
Glandular extracts of parathyroid 
may be prescribed. 

Excessive parathyroid secretion 
stimulates the kidney to remove from 
the blood and excrete in the urine too 
much phosphorus. The bones, func¬ 
tioning as a reserve supply of phos¬ 
phorus, release the phosphorus to 
compensate for what the blood lacks 
and in doing this also release calcium, 
thus depriving the bones of an essen¬ 
tial constituent and giving the blood 
an excess. The result is a bone con¬ 
dition, called osteitis fibrosa or osteo¬ 
porosis, in which the bones are so 
fragile that they can be cut with a 
knife. They are easily broken by a 
mild shock. Such accidents may occur 
repeatedly and healing may be ac¬ 
companied by permanent deformity 
-in the bones unless great care is taken 
to prevent it. The deformities caused 
by twisting and other abnormalities 
are called osteomalacia. The exces¬ 
sive calcium in the blood tends to 


form stones or calculi at various 

points in the body. 

Excessive parathyroid activity may 
be the result of a tumor of one or 
more of the glands; and when this 
occurs, surgical removal is the only 
effective measure. 

Another serious effect of para¬ 
thyroid overactivity is damage to and 
gradual inflammation of the kidneys 
from the excretion of too much cal¬ 
cium and phosphorus through them. 
This condition is not necessarfly fatal 
since the underlying cause can usu¬ 
ally be treated effectively, after which 
the kidneys resume their normal state. 

PARESIS® Persons who have had 
syphilis over a period of time some¬ 
times develop in later years a con¬ 
dition known as paresis. It is also 
called general paralysis, general pare¬ 
sis, general paralysis of the insane 
or dementia paralytica, or paretic 
neurosyphilis. The syphilis has in¬ 
fected the brain and coverings of 
the brain, resulting in a tissue damage 
sufficient to cause paralysis and 
mental disturbance. Paresis is three to 
five times more frequent in men than 
women. 

Among the first symptoms are 
slight changes in behavior, such as 
irritability, carelessness in dress and 
hygiene, lack of judgment, forgetful¬ 
ness, inability to concentrate, and 
slowness of comprehension. Besides 
these symptoms of nervous disorder, 
certain signs of motor disturbance are 
manifested, including disturbances in 
dexterity, lack of coordination, and 
tremor of the hands. Changes in facial 
expression may develop, and often 
there is difficulty in pronunciation 


572 



PAiKiriSON^S DISEASE 


PELLAGRA 


and speech defects with sibilants. In 
the pupH of the eye, dilation or re¬ 
action to light is lost, but adjustment 
to objects at different distances, ac¬ 
commodation, is retained. 

As paresis develops, new symptoms 
of mental disorder are manifested. In 
some cases the person feels euphoric 
and has grandiose ideas of wealth 
and power, sometimes expressed in 
eccentric behavior. Or he may feel 
depressed, persecuted, and be self- 
deprecatory. Still another case may 
display a pronounced loss of memory 
and difficulty in calculation and 
writing. 

Eventually the damage to the brain 
becomes so great as to cause general 
paralysis and require hospitalization 
with bed rest. The use of penicillin 
has largely replaced all earlier forms 
of treatment and has been effective 
in a high percentage of cases where 
damage has not progressed to a hope¬ 
less state. When the patient cannot 
tolerate penicillin, other antibiotics, 
especially the group known as the 
tetracylines, have been found effec¬ 
tive. See also syphilis. 

PAEKMSON^S DISEASE- See pa¬ 
ralysis AGITANS. 

PAMMY’S DISEASE, a name given 
to toxic goiter. It is named after 
Caleb Hillier Parry (1755-1822), the 
English physician who described it. It 
is also called Graves’ disease and 
Basedow’s disease. See also goiter. 

PARTURITION, the act of giving 
birth to a child. See also pregnancy 
AND prenatal CARE. 


PATCH TEST, an aUergy test in 
which a small patch of adhesive con¬ 
taining a substance to which a person 
may be sensitive is applied to the skin. 
The appearance of redness and in¬ 
flammation is considered to be posi¬ 
tive proof of such sensitivity. See also 
ALLERGY. 


PEDIATRICIAN, or pediatrist, a 
specialist in children’s diseases. His 
special field is called pediatrics. 

PEDICULOSIS. See lice. 


PELLAGRA, a dietary deficiency dis¬ 
ease, once prevalent in the United 
States, especially in the South. It is 
due to malnutrition and is caused by 
a diet deficient in, among other es- ^ 
sential vitamins and minerals, nicdT 
tinic acid or niacin, which is ab% 



Peilugra—Pellagrous lesions on the elbows. 
Lesions usually appear on areas exposed to 
sunlight and subjected to frequent friction 


or trauma. 


573 


PELVIS 


PELVIS 


lutely vital for growth and health of 
the human body. Symptoms of pel¬ 
lagra are chiefly inflammation of the 
mouth, redness and soreness of the 
tongue, secondary cracking of the 
skin and ulceration around the mouth. 
The skin of the back of the hands 
and the forearms may become red 
and thickened, and the neck and chest 
are sometimes similarly involved. The 
alimentary tract is affected and diar¬ 
rhea, vomiting, and loss of appetite 
appear. Other symptoms may be 
headache, irritability, anxiety, mus¬ 
cular weakness, and—in extreme 
cases—^melancholia and dementia. 

In the South, persons with pellagra 
had often existed on a diet of pork 
fat, com bread, and corn syrup. The 
United States Public Health Service 
has attempted to reduce the frequency 
of pellagra by educating these people 


to the need to supplement their diet 
with tomatoes, green peas, other 
green and yellow vegetables and 

foods. 

To treat peUagra, usually an im¬ 
provement in diet is all that is re¬ 
quired. Nicotinic acid deficiency is 
corrected by large doses of nicotina¬ 
mide. 

If pellagra has existed for a long 
time and much weight has been lost, 
a Mgh-calorie diet is given the patient, 
and sometimes bed rest is required. 
In a severe case, the person may have 
been so weakened by Ms condition 
that he must be urged to eat and 
rest. 

Antibiotics are used to treat the 
skin until it has healed through 
proper diet and rest, 

FELVISs a basin-shaped ring of bones 
at the base of the trunk. Joining 



p^elvis—Mode! of the female pelvis. Before childbirth the obstetrician measyres the diameters 
of the pelvis with an instrument shaped like calipers. 


574 


PEMPHIGUS 


PENIS 


the spine and the legs. The gaps in 
the skeletal structure are filled with 
muscles and membranesj actualy 
forming a closed basin. 

The female pelvis may be de¬ 
formed from birth or as a result of 
disease, presenting special problems 
in childbixth. The obstetrician meas¬ 
ures the dimensions and capacity of 
the pelvis of a pregnant woman to 
determine whether or not difficulties 
will be encountered in parturition, 
the act of giving birth. This is 
known as pelvimetry, or measure¬ 
ment of the pelvis. 

The pelvis of either men or women 
may be fractured as the result of 
accident, 

PEMPHIGUS^ an acute or chronic 
disease of the skin, characterized by 
the appearance of large blisters which 
develop in crops or in continuous 
succession. 

The chronic form of pemphigus, 
pemphigus vulgaris, was formerly 
fatal in a large number of cases, but 
B now successfully treated with 
ACTH and cortisone, and fatality al¬ 
most never occurs. The disfiguriug 
and annoying skin lesions which the 
disease produces are now also success¬ 
fully treated. 

Acute febrile or fever pemphigus 
most frequently attacks butchers and 
persons who handle animal carcasses. 
The symptoms are usually fever and 
headache. Provided treatment begins 
early enough, the different types of 
pemphigus respond well to cortisone 
and ACTH. 

PENICILLINj an antibacterial drug. 
In 1929 an English bacteriologist. 


Sir Alexander Fleming, observed that 
the mold known as pemcilium nota- 
tum interfered with growth of 
cultures of staphylococci and that 
germs did not grow for some distance 
around the peniciUiii mold. This ob¬ 
servation later led to the extraction of 
penicillin by other scientists into a 
form which could be used in treat¬ 
ment of disease. 

Penicillin is used against germs 
which cause pneumonia, meningitis, 
gonorrhea, boils, common throat in- 
fection, and various staphylococcal 
diseases. It is also extremely effective 
in treatment of syphilis, replacing 
most of the earlier remedies. Subacute 
bacterial endocarditis, formerly fatal 
in a great number of cases, has been 
found to be controllable by penicillin. 
Penicillin is also used for trench 
mouth, rat-bite fever, and other in¬ 
fectious diseases. 

The discovery of penicillin led to 
the development of streptomycin, 
Aureomycin, and many other anti¬ 
biotics which have helped enormously 
to combat a great number of infec¬ 
tious diseases. See also antibiotics. 

PENIS, the male organ of copulation, 
which also contains the urethra which 
carries urine from the bladder to the 
outside of the body. 

The penis and urethra are subject 
to various disorders, infections, and 
structural irregularities. Hypospadias 
is a structural malformation of the 
urethra, in which a splitting of parts 
of the penis occurs so that the open¬ 
ing of the urethra is at the lower 
side of the penis instead of the front. 
Epispadias is a condition in which 


575 



PEPTIC ULCER 


PEPTIC ULCER 


the floor of the urethra transverses 
the top of the penis instead of the 
underside. An operation is required 
in both cases to correct the condition. 
Tumors, either benign or malignant, 
may also occur in the urethra or 
penis. See also testicles. 

PEPTIC ULCER. An ulcer is any 
sore or break in the surface usually 
of the skin or mucous membrane, re¬ 
sulting from destruction of the under¬ 
lying tissues or from loss of the 
covering layer of tissue. Peptic ulcer, 
commonly known as “ulcers,” is a 
chronic condition in which the lining 
of the stomach or duodenum, the 
first part of the small intestine, is in¬ 
flamed as a result of the action of 
digestive juices on the mucous mem¬ 
brane. 

Peptic ulcers are found four times 
as often in men as in women, and ten 
to twelve times as often in the duode¬ 
num as in the stomach. They usually 
occur in definite locations which are 
bathed freely or regularly in gastric 
juices. Thus the upper part of the 
duodenum, which receives partially 
digested food along with a certain 
amount of gastric juice as it is sent 
to the intestines, is a place where 
peptic ulcers are particularly apt to 
develop. 

Pain, the outstanding symptom of 
peptic ulcer, usually occurs at certain 
regular times and is relieved by eat¬ 
ing. Constipation is another common 
symptom. Nausea, vomiting, loss of 
appetite, and even anemia may oc¬ 
casionally be symptoms. Unfortu¬ 
nately most persons suffer s3miptoms 


over a period of five to eight years 
before seeking medical advice. 

The doctor diagnoses peptic ulcer 
with x-rays, which will reveal the 
presence of an ulcer in the stomach 
in a great majority of cases but an 
ulcer in the duodenum with less 
accuracy. The gastroscope and fluoro- 
scope with the aid of barium often 
can indicate the presence of ulcers 
when the x-ray has failed to do so. 

Continued neutralization of the 
gastric juice relieves the pain, and 
this may be accomplished by use of 
antacids, which combine aluminum 
hydroxide and magnesia products. 
They are taken every two hours, 
alternating with food of some kind 
or milk so that the person takes milk, 
food, or antacid every waking hour. 

Besides antacid powders and pastes 
to insure neutralization of the acid 
present in the gastric juices, drugs are 
prescribed which block the nerve im¬ 
pulses to the stomach and have an 
antispasmodic and sedative eflfect. 

In addition, the doctor will prepare 
a diet which is suited to the con¬ 
dition. The diet will avoid seeds, 
skins, and foods with coarse fibers, as 
well as being nutritionally balanced to 
promote general health and healing 
of the ulcer. 

One of the most serious compli¬ 
cations of peptic ulcer is acute per¬ 
foration of tbe wall of either the 
stomach or the duodenum, which 
often occurs without warning. In 
most cases, surgical treatment is re¬ 
quired to repair the damage. A more 
frequent complication is destruction 
of a large blood vessel in the wall of 
the stomach or duodenum, causing 


576 



PERICARDITIS 


PERINEUM 


massive hemorrhage with vomiting of 
blood and appearance of black tarry 
stools. Treatment of hemorrhage in¬ 
cludes complete bed rest, blood trans¬ 
fusions if needed, and intravenous 
feeding until the patient can be fed 
orally. Then small but frequent meals 
of miUc and cream are given and 
soft foods gradually added until a 
fairly strict ulcer diet is effected. 
Surgical treatment is usually not re¬ 
quired. Under such management the 
bleeding stops and the ulcer is 
brought under control. Antacids, 
antispasmodic and sedative drugs are 
also part of the treatment. 

Smoking, use of alcohol, and over¬ 
exertion may aggravate ulcer for¬ 
mation and delay healing, and there¬ 
fore doctors recommend abstinence 
from tobacco and alcohol and only 
moderate exercise. 

Since psychological factors seem to 
be involved in the development of 
peptic ulcers, and since tense hard- 
driving persons appear to be more 
likely to develop them, treatment 
often emphasizes the need for re¬ 
duced anxiety and tension. This can 
sometimes be effected by a change in 
occupation, a long restful vacation, 
or by psychotherapy. 

PERICARDITIS, an acute or chronic 
inflammation of the pericardium 
which covers and encloses the heart; 
it is caused by infection in the heart, 
or from infections in other parts of 
the body, from rheumatism, or 
wounds or tumors m the heart. 

Some of the usual symptoms are 
pain over the heart, a rise in the pulse 
rate and temperature. In the dry or 


fibrinous form of pericarditis, the 
doctor can hear the sound of friction 
in the heart region made by the 
roughening of the wall of the peri¬ 
cardium and the formation of fibrin¬ 
ous material. In more extreme cases, 
so much fibrinous material may de¬ 
velop that the heart becomes encased 
and constricted in its movement. 
Surgery is sometimes successful in re¬ 
moving such calcified material. Oc¬ 
casionally fluid forms in such quantity 
that it becomes imperative to tap 
the pericardium and drain the fluid. 
This occurs mostly in cases of peri¬ 
carditis which result from rheuma¬ 
tism. In another form of pericarditis, 
adhesions form which anchor the 
heart to surrounding tissue; these 
also require surgery. 

In most cases of pericarditis, the 
infection which is the cause is treated. 
The use of antibiotics has been 
effective. When pericarditis is as¬ 
sociated with tuberculosis, a long 
period of bed rest must accompany 
the antibacterial treatment. 

PERINEUM, the part of the female 
body between the external genitals 
and the anus. In childbirth, these 
tissues are subject to great pressure 
and often tear and must be sewn up 
by the obstetrician. To prevent tear¬ 
ing during delivery, the doctor often 
makes an incision of the appropriate 
length in the perineum, which is later 
sewn and permitted to heal. After the 
delivery, the application of analgesic 
ointments and other preparations, as 
well as sitz baths, are helpful meas¬ 
ures in healing the tom or incised 
perineum. 


577 



PERITONITIS 


PERSPIRATION 


PERITONITIS, inflammation of the 
peritoneum, the membrane which 
lines the abdominal cavity. The 
peritoneum can be afiected by many 
disturbances and inflammation is the 
most serious. Occasionally peritonitis 
is the result of direct injury to the ab¬ 
domen, but usually it is a by-product 
of infection of one of the organs 
lying within the peritoneum, or of 
infection of the blood. 

Acute peritonitis develops rapidly 
and a physician shoidd be consulted 
as soon as possible. Death can re¬ 
sult within a few hours or days fol¬ 
lowing the onset of peritonitis. 

The basic treatment is usually 
surgery and antibiotics. The perito¬ 
neal cavity must be opened and the 
infectious material removed. The 
microorganisms ordinarily involved 
in peritonitis are usually susceptible 
to effective control by penicillin and 
the sulfa drugs, and these drugs have 
been largely responsible for decreas¬ 
ing the once high fatality rate. How¬ 
ever, successful treatment depends on 
early diagnosis and treatment. 

Peritonitis is the most serious 
complication of appendicitis and may 
also follow the rupture of an ulcer 
of the stomach or intestine. Infection 
and pain begin almost simultaneously, 
the pain being most intense at the 
point of infection. A generalized feel¬ 
ing of acute illness follows as the 
body absorbs the poisons from the in¬ 
fection. The temperature rises, the 
abdomen is sensitive to touch, the 
abdominal wall is rigid, and vomiting 
begins. See also appendicitis. 

PERNICIOUS ANEMIA. See ane¬ 
mia. 

578 


PERSPIRATION, or sweat, the fluid, 
largely water, excreted by the sweat 
or sudoriferous glands, situated be¬ 
neath the outer surface of the skin 
with ducts opening into them. The 
chief function of sweating is to regu¬ 
late body temperature. As moisture 
evaporates, heat energy is absorbed 
and in the process the surface on 
which evaporation takes place is 
cooled. Sweating is one of the main 
methods by which the body maintains 
the constant temperature vital to 
health and life. 

The sweat glands are situated m 
the deepest of the several skin layers 
and communicate with the skin sur¬ 
face by corkscrew-shaped tubes. More 
of these glands are found per square 
inch in the palms of the hands and 
soles of the feet than elsewhere in 
the body. Those in the armpits and 
groin are the largest. The fluid exuded 
is 98 to 99 per cent water, plus a 
slight amount of salts and urea. Per¬ 
spiration is normally acid, but when 
sweating is profuse, it becomes alka¬ 
line. About a pint to a pint and a half 
of water is exuded as sweat daily. 

The body releases water in other 
ways than by sweating. About two 
quarts of water a day are exhaled in 
the breath; another quart and a half 
to two quarts passes in the urine. 

Sweat passes throu^ the skin to 
the surface constantly. When it evap¬ 
orates immediately without dampness, 
it is called insensible perspiration. 
When the sweating is more pro¬ 
fuse and noticeable, it is called sensi¬ 
ble perspiration. The amount of 
sweating varies according to the ex¬ 
ternal temperature and the amount of 
exertion, part of the body, individual 



PERTUSSIS 


PHARYNX 


differences, and emotional factors. 
During an exciting motion picture, a 
person may sweat 50 per cent more 
than usual. One investigation indi¬ 
cated that sweating from the bottoms 
of the hands and feet was five to ten 
times greater than from other areas 
of the body. 

The odor of sweat depends on the 
part of the body from which it 
comes. In winter, when persons per¬ 
spire less, the urine will be lighter 
colored than during warmer weather. 

Disorders of the sweat glands range 
from simple excessive perspiration to 
a serious underlying condition. Usu¬ 
ally the annoyance of excessive per¬ 
spiration can be alleviated by proper 
clothing, dusting powders, and an 
effective deodorant or antiperspirant. 
Some drugs limit sweating, but should 
not be applied to large areas of the 
body without a doctor’s prescription. 
Profuse sweating occurs in malaria, 
tuberculosis, and rickets, which, of 
course, require medical attention. 
Light sweating is not rmcommon; 
however, total failure of the body to 
sweat is rare. Drugs to encourage per¬ 
spiration are available. Other condi¬ 
tions are bromidrosis, in which the 
perspiration has an offensive odor, 
and chromidrosis, in which the sweat 
turns black, blue, green, red, and 
yellow, believed to be due to in¬ 
fection by specific microorganisms. 
See also body odor. 

PERTUSSIS. See whooping cough. 

PHARYNGITIS. See PHARYNX. 

PHARYNX, the area in the throat 
between the mouth and the opening 


of the esophagus or gullet. It func¬ 
tions as a resonating organ in speech. 
A group of semicircular muscles in 
the pharynx also help in the swallow¬ 
ing of food. The pharynx is generally 
divided into the nasal pharynx, ex¬ 
tending to the nose, and the lar 5 mgeal 
pharynx, leading to the lar 3 mx and 
trachea. 

The mucous lining of the pharynx 
may be affected by acute or chronic 
inflammation as the secondary effect 
of a severe cold, sore throat, or acute 
tonsillitis. It may also be infected by 
streptococci, as in septic sore throat. 
In most forms of acute pharyngitis 
the infection attacks suddenly, and 
the mucous linin g becomes swollen, 
purple, and glazed, and covered by 
thick mucus. The uvula may swell 
and the tonsils also be seriously 
affected. Sometimes the swelling is 
severe enough to interfere with 
breathing; and fever, coughing, and 
a feeling of fatigue may-develop. 

The most effective treatment in¬ 
cludes complete bed rest, hot drinks, 
drugs to control the fever, and gar¬ 
gling with warm salt water to allay 
the soreness. The doctor will employ 
intramuscular injections of penicillin 
in streptococcal sore throat and in 
other forms in which the organisms 
are responsive to penicillin. When 
penicillin is not tolerated by the 
patient, other antibiotics are used. 
Antibiotics are also effective in treat¬ 
ing Vincent’s angina, another form 
of throat infection which affects the 
pharynx. 

Chronic pharyngitis of various 
types may result from repeated 
attacks of acute pharyngitis, and it is 

579 



PHENOLPHTHALEIN 


PHLEBITIS 


frequently associated with chronic 
colds, sinusitis, and nasal infections. 
Simple persistent inflammation of the 
phar 3 mx is characterized by symptoms 
similar to the acute form, but is 
much less severe and without compli¬ 
cations. It may be caused by smoking 
or inhalation of dust. The doctor 
usually applies medication while he 
searches for the underlying cause 
which he endeavors to eliminate. 

In hypertrophic phar 5 mgitis, an¬ 
other chronic form, the lymph nodes 
are also involved. A small amount of 
thick mucus in the throat may cause 
difficulty in expectorating and the 
patient will have a cough. 

In atrophic pharyngitis, or dry sore 
throat, thick crusts form in the throat 
which produce a foul odor and are 
difficult to remove. Dry sore throat is 
often induced by diabetes, but may 
also result from decreased secretion 
of mucus in the throat during old 
age, or it may follow a similar con¬ 
dition affecting the nose. If it spreads 
from the throat to the larynx, 
hoarseness and coughing will result 
and the surface of the pharynx have 
a shellacked appearance. The doctor 
can apply proper medication and take 
steps to eliminate the causative con¬ 
dition. 

PHENOLPHTHALEIN, a drug used 
as a laxative in constipation. In gen¬ 
eral it is less toxic than most other 
laxatives and is a constituent of 
many commercial laxatives. Although 
rarely, certain persons are sensitive 
to it. 

PHLEBITIS, inflammation of a vein, 
accompanied by swelling and pain. 


When i n fection and clotting occur, 
the condition is thrombophlebitis. 
Blood vessels that are swollen and 
knotted are often described as vari¬ 
cose. 

Any iUness which slows the blood 
circulation and which entails a long 
period of lying down may induce for¬ 
mation of clots in the blood vessels 
of the legs. After such an illness, 
when the person walks, clots may 
form, the legs swell and become 
blue, and even lameness result. To 
relieve this type of phlebitis, the foot 
of the bed is elevated and the legs 
kept free of pressure with a bed 
cradle. The legs may also be wrapped 
in soft cotton and placed on a pillow 
when the patient is sleeping, or a 
semielastic bandage worn. Moderate 
exercise is sometimes helpful. Re¬ 
covery usually occurs in about ten 
days. 

The greatest danger in phlebitis is 
that a clot may break off and form an 
embolism and lodge in a vital blood 
vessel leading to the heart, lungs, 
or brain. Fortunately this rarely 
happens. More frequently the clotting 
divides into small infected clots 
which travel to other parts of the 
body where secondary infections or 
abscesses may form. 

Acute phlebitis is often painful. 
However, with modem treatment, the 
pain usually disappears as soon as 
the condition is brought under con¬ 
trol. Treatment may include injection 
of drugs which both bring relief from 
pain and prevent clotting or coagula¬ 
tion. Dicumarol, which prevents 
blood coagulation, is widely used to 
treat acute phlebitis and other throm- 


580 



PHTHISIS 


PHYSICAL THEiAPY 


boses. Treatment may continue for 
weeks and sometimes months, and 
care must be taken to prevent pres¬ 
sure on veins. 

PHTHISIS^ an old term used for 
tuberculosis or any disease character¬ 
ized by emaciation and loss of 
strength, especially diseases of the 
lungs. See also tuberculosis. 

PHYSICAL THERAPY, the treat¬ 
ment of disease and disability by 
physical means, often by use of 
water, air, heat, massage, electricity, 
and exercise. This branch of medi¬ 
cine has undergone extensive and spe¬ 
cialized development in recent years 
and enormously benefited innumera¬ 
ble paralyzed and disabled persons. 
Physiotherapy, as it is often called, 
has restored function to limbs or 
organs stricken by poliomyelitis, 
arthritis, muscular dystrophy, effects 
of tumors in the brain or nervous sys¬ 
tem and accidental injuiy. Even parts 
of the body totally disabled are some¬ 
times restored to partial or complete 
use. 

A variety of equipment and 
methods are utilized in physical 
therapy. High-frequency electrical 
current can be directed deep into the 
tissue of the body with a diathermy 
machine or infrared lamp, and is fre¬ 
quently used in treating inflamed 
joints, bursitis, infections of the 
sinus, and other conditions difficult to 
penetrate. Hydrotherapy, treatment 
by water in tanks, pools, or large 
baths, makes use of the buoyancy of 
water to treat paralyzed arms and 
legs. The whirlpool, a special water 


device in which water circulates in a 
whirling motion at any desired tem¬ 
perature, produces a mild massaging 
movement and is used, for example, 
on a leg in which circulation of the 
blood has been retarded. In the con¬ 
stant-flow bath, the disturbed patient 
is placed in a canvas-type cradle with 
only his head above the surface and 
gently circulating tepid water soothes 
the nerves and induces relaxation and 
sleep. 

Treatment to restore weakened 
muscles usually begins by subjecting 
them to a gentle motion, as in hydro¬ 
therapy. The patient performs simple 
exercises which increase in com¬ 
plexity as the muscles strengthen and 
become better coordinated. The treat¬ 
ment may include special devices 
such as stationary bicycles, weight 
lifts, and walkers. In the case of a 
paralyzed diaphragm, a machine 
which alternates air pressure and 
partial vacuum, such as the iron lung, 
enables the lung to move. 

Occupational therapy is in a sense 
a variation of physical therapy and 
often is an essential part of rehabili¬ 
tation of disabilities. The patient en¬ 
gages in activities which not only 
require him to use his disabled parts 
but which also help him develop new 
skills and crafts. 

The development of new equip¬ 
ment has aided in the advancement 
of the entire field of physical therapy 
and today highly trained and spe¬ 
cialized technicians are required to 
administer treatment under the super¬ 
vision of the doctor. Physical therapy 
has come a long way from the hot- 
water bottle and heating pad. 


581 



PiGMENTATiON 


PINEAL GLAND 


PIGMENTATION, coloration of the 
skin; it is determined not only by the 
amount and nature of the pigment in 
the epidermis, but also by the color of 
the blood and the size of the blood 
vessels, especially those which are 
close to the surface. 

The skin of a light-haired person 
contains little pigmentation, so that 
the blood shows through rather 
clearly. In a brunette, the pigmenta¬ 
tion is heavier and the blood less 
visible. When the skin is almost 
black, the blood underneath is virtu¬ 
ally invisible. 

Flushing of the skin, a special 
aspect of skin pigmentation, is due 
to a temporary enlarging of the blood 
vessels close to the surface of the 
body, set oflE by certain nerves, and 
is provoked physiologically—^by di¬ 
rect exposure to the sun, for example 
—or psychologically by emotional 
experiences such as embarrassment 
or confusion. See also freckles; 
LIVER spots; melanosis; sunburn. 

PILES. See hemorrhoids. 

PILONIDAL CYST, a term which 
goes back to ancient times and comes 
from two Latin words, pilus and 
nidus, meaning nest and hair or nest 
of hair. A pilonidal cyst develops 
from an improperly formed glandu¬ 
lar organ, found under the skin at 
the end of the spine, which contains 
hair follicles and which secretes se¬ 
baceous and other fluids that have no 
outlet. This causes formation of a 
cyst, which may become infected 
and cause pain. The cysts seem to 
occur most frequently in men be¬ 
tween the ages of twenty and forty- 


five. During World War II, men who 
sat for long periods in bumpy jeeps, 
trucks, and planes sometimes devel¬ 
oped pilonidal cysts due to the irrita¬ 
tion at the base of the spine. In some 
cases the cyst became as large as an 

egg. 

The cysts are sometimes treated 
with temporary measures, including 
sitz baths and a minor incision to 
draw off fluid under pressure. How¬ 
ever, when the opening of the cyst 
is blocked with hair, dirt, and body 
secretions, surgery is required. Con¬ 
siderable abnormal tissue must be 
excised and sufficient time spent in 
the hospital to allow complete heal¬ 
ing. In some cases the excision is so 
extensive that plastic surgery and 
other reparative measures are re¬ 
quired. 

PINEAL GLAND, an organ, about 
the size of a pea, located in the head 
near the lower part of the brain. Its 
function, although considered vital 
in the human system, is not clearly 
understood. Recently researchers at 
Yale University discovered a hor¬ 
mone which is secreted from the 
pineal gland, but thus far its func¬ 
tion is not completely known. One 
hormone is melanotonin concerned 
with pigmentation. 

Enlargement of the pineal gland 
may crowd the passage through 
which the cerebrospinal fluid flows 
out of the brain into the spinal cord. 
When the canal is closed entirely, 
the brain fluid, seeking escape, creates 
such pressure that death may result. 

Attempts to learn the function of 
the pineal gland in experimental work 


582 



PINKEYE 


PITUITARY 


with animals have included both 
destruction of the gland and admin¬ 
istration of excess amounts of a 
pineal extract. When the gland is 
eliminated in guinea pigs, their sex 
organs grow to greater size and more 
rapidly than normal. Results with 
pineal extract are less certain, because 
a pineal extract has not yet been made 
which has demonstrable and unques¬ 
tioned activity. Animals fed such an 
extract seem to grow larger and be¬ 
come stronger than others; however, 
they also manifest retarded develop¬ 
ment of the sex organs. The supposi¬ 
tion is that pineal extract slows down 
excessively rapid growth and retards 
overactivity of the sex glands. 

Tumors of the pineal gland are 
rare, and in young boys cause devel¬ 
opment of sexual organs to adult size 
and function. They do not have the 
same effect on young girls. A pineal 
tumor in an adult woman may cause 
menstruation to cease, and in an adult 
man may provoke the sex glands and 
testes to degenerate. 

Although surgical removal of the 
pineal gland is not often advisable, 
because of the high mortality rate, in 
some cases permanent cure has been 
achieved by this means. Radiation 
therapy may bring a temporary cure. 

PINKEYE, an inflammation of the 
conjunctiva, the tissue which covers 
the inner surface of the eyelid. It 
may be caused by a germ often car¬ 
ried on towels or on soiled hands. 
The eyes become red and the eyelids 
swollen and puffy. Often the eyelids 
are stuck together with pus when the 
person awakens from sleep. Medical 
treatment varies, depending on the 


type of germ involved. A similar ap¬ 
pearance, called vernal conjuncti¬ 
vitis, may develop as the result of 
allergy. See also conjunctivitis. 

PINWORM. See worms. 

PITUITARY, the most important 
gland of the endocrine system, or 
glands of internal secretion. This 
gland secretes substances into the 
blood which are carried to organs in 
other parts of the body where they 
exert significant effects. Thus, the en- 
docrme system regulates many of the 
most important of the bodily func¬ 
tions. These include growth, sexual 
development, defenses against emer¬ 
gencies and disease, and many met¬ 
abolic processes. The pituitary per¬ 
forms an unusual number of these 
and, in addition, controls other en¬ 
docrine glands. Endocrine secretions 
are called hormones. 

The pituitary is divided into two 
distinct portions; the anterior and the 
posterior. The anterior is much more 
important, having a profoimd role in 
bodily growth, the development and 
activity of the adrenal cortex, the 
sex glands, the thyroid, and the pan¬ 
creas. The posterior is related espe¬ 
cially to water retention by the kid¬ 
neys. 

The mechanisms involved in con¬ 
trol of growth are not fully under¬ 
stood, but the significance of the 
pituitary in the process is well estab¬ 
lished. The growth hormone, if ex¬ 
cessive during childhood and adoles¬ 
cence, will produce giants, and if 
insufacient, dwarfs. If pituitary over¬ 
activity occurs later in life when the 
principal bones have lost capacity to 

583 



PITUITARY 


PITUITARY 


grow further, those of the extremities 
—the head, hands, and feet—^may 
enlarge, resulting in a condition 
called acromegaly. The face may as¬ 
sume a coarse look and the tongue 
grow. Usually due to a pituitary tu¬ 
mor, acromegaly can be treated by 
surgery or x-ray. 

When the pituitary is removed 
from an immature animal, its long 
bones soon cease to expand and its 
total size and weight remain smaller 
than normal. 

Another function of the pituitary 
is the stimulation of the sex glands to 
maturity. This occurs at puberty, un¬ 
til which time the pituitary growth 
hormone controls growth. When the 
sex glands, under the pituitary stimu¬ 
lus, develop to a point of secreting 
the full amount of their own hor¬ 
mones, the growth hormone ceases 
to affect increase in height. The 
pituitary continues throughout life, 
however, to secrete growth substance, 
but its function after the attainment 
of physical maturity is not yet fully 
understood. 

When pregnancy occurs, a hor¬ 
mone related to the female periodic 
cycle becomes superfluous for the 
time being and is excreted in the 
urine. The Aschheim-Zondek test 
for pregnancy is based on this fact. 
In this test, immature rabbits or 
mice are injected with urine from 
the patient. If the hormone is being 
excreted and is present in the urine, 
the animals mature in a few days 
which signifies that the person is 
pregnant. This test achieves 98 to 99 
per cent accuracy. 

Slow sexual development in young 


people and reduction of fertility be¬ 
cause of underactive testes or ovaries 
in adults can be treated by extracts 
of pituitary gland containing the sex- 
stimulating pituitary hormones. 

One of the most significant pitui¬ 
tary secretions is ACTH, the initials 
of the term adreno-cortico-lrophic 
hormone, which means that the sub¬ 
stance has a special affinity for the 
cortex or outer part of the adrenal 
gland. Since the adrenal cortex is 
greatly involved with meeting stresses 
of practically aU kinds which the 
body bears, the function of the pitui¬ 
tary substance which stimulates it is 
particularly significant. ACTH is now 
used, with much the same effect as 
cortisone, an adrenal-cortical hor¬ 
mone, to relieve several diseases, in¬ 
cluding arthritis, asthma, hives, and 
exceptionally high fever. 

When the pituitary is removed, the 
adrenal glands degenerate. Degenera¬ 
tion of the adrenals also causes Addi¬ 
son’s disease, which was formerly 
fatal. Now the lives of patients with 
such disorders may be extended by 
use of hormones derived from the 
adrenal cortex. 

Other pituitary substances are as¬ 
sociated with the secretion of milk 
and the activity of the thyroid gland. 

The posterior pituitary is con¬ 
nected with retention of water by 
the kidneys. Many nerve fibers con¬ 
nect it to the section of the brain 
involved in regulating weight, sleep, 
muscular coordination, and emo¬ 
tional activity. It affects the system of 
involuntary muscles when these are 
inactive and so is sometimes used in 
aiding childbirth and stimulating the 


584 



PLACENTA 


PLAGUE 


bowels. The posterior pituitary also 
is involved in controlling blood sugar. 

General pituitary inactivity renders 
a person dull and slow, in mind as 
well as body. Sleep occurs easily and 
fat accumulates. In young children 
this inactivity retards both mental 
and sexual development. Overactivity 
of the pituitary induces a variety of 
symptoms. 

Other pituitary functions include a 
relationship with the parts of the 
pancreas producing insulin, which 
regulates body utilization of sugar, 
and another relationship with the thy¬ 
roid gland. When the pancreas is re¬ 
moved from an animal, sugar appears 
in its blood and urine, since sugar 
cannot be used properly without in¬ 
sulin. If the pituitary is also removed, 
these symptoms are relieved. Re¬ 
moval of the pituitary with the pan¬ 
creas left intact causes a diminution 
of sugar. 

A pituitary secretion partially con¬ 
trols the thyroid, and deficient thy¬ 
roid activity leads to pituitary en¬ 
largement. The th 5 n:oid is enlarged, 
in turn, by administration of the 
pituitary hormone related to it. Pitui¬ 
tary deficiency tends to lower the 
basal metabolism which functions 
closely with the thyroid. The pitui¬ 
tary also influences the parathyroid 
glands which are involved with the 
body’s use of calcium. 

A possible relationship between the 
pituitary and growth, and the proc¬ 
esses which lead to cancer is being in¬ 
vestigated. Cases have been recorded 
in which a cancer of the prostate 
gland and of the breast have been 
controlled by removal of the pitui¬ 
tary. 


Among the most serious disorders 
which involve the pituitary is Cush¬ 
ing’s disease, in which a tumor in the 
anterior lobe causes, among other 
symptoms, obesity of the abdomen, 
face, and buttocks. Atrophy, or de¬ 
generation, of the anterior lobe in 
adults results in Simmond’s disease, 
characterized by extreme emaciation. 
In rare cases of Froehlich’s syn¬ 
drome, the anterior lobe is so affected 
as to produce extreme obesity and in¬ 
fantile sexual organs. See also gush¬ 
ing’s DISEASE, 

PLACENTA. See afterbirth; re¬ 
production SYSTEM. 

PLAGUE, a contagious disease, 
endemic in eastern Asia and in former 
times occurring epidemically in Eu¬ 
rope and Asia Minor. In the Middle 
Ages, epidemics of various kinds used 
to devastate populations. Called the 
Black Death, the plague spread 
throughout Europe, often wiping out 
entire sections of population. For ex¬ 
ample, Florence, between 1345 and 
1350, lost almost half of its inhabit¬ 
ants from the bubonic plague. The 
plague is thought to have been intro¬ 
duced into Europe from China, via 
the trade routes. Medieval physicians 
believed that the air was filled with 
the contagion of the plague. 

Today it has been learned that such 
plagues are due to the spread of small, 
rod-shaped germs, pasteurella pestis, 
which are transmitted to man by the 
rat flea. 

The two most common forms of 
plague are bubonic and pneumonic 
plague. In bubonic plague, swollen 
abscesses appear in the groin, com- 

585 



PLATELETS 


PNEUMONIA 


monly called the bubo, accompanied 
by swelling and hypertrophy of one 
or more lymph nodes. The disease 
also affects the blood, spleen, and 
liver. In pneumonic plague, the 
germs infect the lungs. 

Modem science has developed 
methods of vaccination against 
plague and techniques of control to 
prevent its spread, so that it is ex¬ 
ceedingly rare in civilized countries. 
Only a few cases of pneumonic or 
bubonic plague have been reported 
in the United States in the past fifty 
years. 

PLATELETS, also called thrombo¬ 
cytes. See BLOOD. 

PLEURISY, a group of symptoms 
produced by inflammation or infec¬ 
tion of the pleura, the lining of the 
chest cavity covering the inside of 
the chest wall, the top of the dia¬ 
phragm, and the outer side of the 
lungs. 

The most common sources of 
pleurisy are pneumonia, tuberculo¬ 
sis, and influenza. The first signs are 
usually pain, which may become se¬ 
vere on taking a deep breath, a 
cough, fever, and rapid shallow 
breathing. In some cases, a quantity 
of fluid is effused. This accumulation 
is known as pleurisy with effusion 
or “wet” pleurisy. Sometimes a large 
amount of pus is formed by second¬ 
ary infection, producing a condition 
knovra as empyema which is ex¬ 
tremely serious and requires immedi¬ 
ate care. 

In the form called “dry” pleurisy, 
which almost always follows an acute 


case of pneumonia, pain appears over 
the site of the infection and with a 
stethoscope the doctor can hear a 
sound of rubbing inside the chest 
cavity. When the underlying infec¬ 
tion is cured, the pleurisy disappears. 

In management of pleurisy, the 
patient should remain in bed, as bed 
rest is almost as significant as medi¬ 
cation in relieving the condition. In 
mild cases, application of heat may 
be helpful. When breathing causes se¬ 
vere pain, the doctor will sometimes 
strap the chest to limit its movement. 
Tapping, to drain off pleural fluid, 
and use of solutions containing anti¬ 
biotics is often effective, and acute 
cases of pleurisy respond rapidly to 
this treatment, and the incidence of 
chronic pleurisy has been greatly re¬ 
duced. An operation may be impera¬ 
tive in cases of severe empyema. 

PNEUMONIA, an inflammation of 
one or both lungs. Many types of 
pneumonia have been distinguished, 
but usually when the word pneu¬ 
monia is used without qualification, 
lobar pneumonia, in which one or 
more entire lobes are infected, is 
implied, and the causative organism 
is the pneumococcus. Other organ¬ 
isms may also produce pneumonia, 
such as the streptococcus and staphy¬ 
lococcus, which may cause broncho¬ 
pneumonia. 

The symptoms of a typical case of 
pneumonia may follow a slight cold 
or infectious disease or may appear 
suddenly without warning. A shaking 
chill may be followed by a sharp 
stabbing pain on the side of or in the 
chest, with coughing and expectora- 


586 



PNEUMONSA 


PNEUMONIA 


tion of brown or bloody sputum. The 
pulse is rapid, the cheeks flushed, 
temperature rises sharply, and weak¬ 
ness and even prostration, headache, 
nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea some¬ 
times ensue. 

The person with pneumonia must 
be put to bed immediately, and care¬ 
fully watched, since restlessness, 
sleeplessness, and even delirium may 
provoke the patient, despite his weak¬ 
ness, to try to get out of bed. 

As the infection progresses, 
changes may take place in the lung 
itself. It may become filled with in¬ 
flammatory material and solidify, 
causing shortness of breath and shal¬ 
low noisy breathing. The blood can¬ 
not obtain sufficient oxygen and so 
the skin and mucous membranes may 
become bluish, a condition known as 
cyanosis. The patient must be placed 
in an oxygen tent to assist his breath¬ 
ing as well as correct the cyanosis. 

During the acute stages of pneu¬ 
monia, care must be taken to prevent 
complications, such as heart failme, 
empyema, distention of the abdo¬ 
men, and abscess. The development 
of other diseases, including pericardi¬ 
tis, endocarditis, meningitis, and arth¬ 
ritis, must also be carefully pre¬ 
vented. 

For a long time pneumonia was a 
dreaded disease with a high mortality 
rate. Treatment depended on the use 
of serums, which were developed to 
combat specific infections, and the 
condition usually led to an acute stage 
with a definite “crisis,” in which the 
patient appeared near collapse. After 
the crisis, a sharp drop in tempera¬ 
ture followed and the patient fell 


into a deep sleep, with subsequent 
recovery in some cases. 

Today the use of sulfonamides and 
antibiotics, such as penicillin, terra- 
mycin, aureomycin, and streptomy¬ 
cin, have decreased the development 
of lung abscess and empyema, and 
the death rate has fallen sharply. 
Good nursing care in pneumonia still 
continues to play a considerable part. 
The recovery period is especially 
significant. The patient should not 
get up from bed or engage in activity 
too early. A complete physical 
checkup, including a chest x-ray ex¬ 
amination, is strongly advised follow¬ 
ing pneumonia. 

The number of cases of virus 
pneumonia has sharply increased, at 
the same time that bacterial pneu¬ 
monia has yielded to treatment with 
sulfa drugs and antibiotics. Although 
the nature of viruses is not com¬ 
pletely understood, and few specific 
measures have been developed to 
combat them, it is known that virus 
pneumonia is produced by a number 
of specific types of virus. Virus pneu¬ 
monia may vary from a mild or 
“walking” state to a serious condition 
requiring hospitalization. In a mild 
case the patient may not suspect that 
he has ansdhing more severe than a 
slight cough and fever, which he may 
ascribe to a cold. In the more severe 
form, fever, sweating, malaise, head¬ 
ache, sore throat, weakness, and a 
dry hacking cough are involved. 

Treatment of virus pneumonia in¬ 
cludes bed rest, even in a mild case. 
Antibiotics are frequently effective 
in preventing complications. It is 
essential to treat the fever and cough; 


557 



POISONING 


POISONING 


and in severe cases in which cyanosis 
is present, an oxygen tent may also 
be required. In general, virus pneu¬ 
monia does not persist more than a 
few days to a week. However, con¬ 
valescence, usually characterized by 
weakness, is often long and slow, and 
x-ray examination of the chest may 
reveal shadows for several weeks. 

POISONING. Any substance which 
is capable of producing a harmful or 
deadly effect can be considered a 
poison. For most such substances 
there is both a safe dose and a poi¬ 
sonous dose, the severity of the ef¬ 
fect depending on the amount taken 
and on the age and physical condi¬ 
tion of the person involved. 

Poisoning is an emergency situa¬ 
tion; the doctor should be called im¬ 
mediately, and first aid given at once. 
Symptoms, although there may be no 
early ones, include nausea, vomiting, 
cramps, and stomach pains. If a 
corrosive poison has been taken, 
bums and stains may appear on and 
around the mouth and tongue. Head¬ 
ache remedies and sleep-producing 
drugs produce drowsiness, sleep, and 
sometimes unconsciousness. 

In first-aid treatment for poisoning, 
two points are important. The first 
is that a poison diluted with a large 
amount of liquid is absorbed less 
quickly than in concentrate and 
vomiting can be induced more easily 
when the stomach is filled. Second, 
once the poison is removed from the 
body it can do no further harm and 
so in some types of poisoning it is 
imperative to induce vomiting re¬ 


peatedly until the fluid ejected is as 
clear as when it was swallowed. 

To dilute the poison and induce 
vomiting various liquids may be 
used: warm soapsuds, soda water 
made with common baking soda, or 
salt water. The liquid should pref¬ 
erably be lukewarm. It may be nec¬ 
essary to give six or seven or more 
glasses of liquid. 

After the stomach is thoroughly 
cleaned out, an antidote may be 
given. A good universal antidote 
which can be given for all cases of 
poisoning and which every household 
should keep on hand consists of the 
following: two parts powdered burnt 
toast, one part milk of magnesia, one 
part strong tea. The carbon in the 
toast absorbs poisons; the magnesium 
has a soothing effect on the mucous 
membranes of the stomach and a 
laxative action which also neutral¬ 
izes acid poisons; and the tannic acid 
in the tea tends to neutralize caustic 
alkaline materials. A heaping table¬ 
spoon of Epsom salts also can be 
given. 

Two important exceptions are 
alkali and acid poisoning. In these 
cases, vomiting should not be in¬ 
duced, to avoid danger of perfora¬ 
tion. In first-aid treatment for acid 
poisoning, neutralize the poison with 
an alkali, such as baking soda, lime 
water, milk of magnesia, or chalk. 
Then give a demulcent, such as milk, 
olive oil, or egg white. The victim 
should be kept warm. 

For alkali poisoning, neutralize 
the alkali with a weak acid such as 
dilute lemon juice or vinegar. Then 


588 



POISONING 


POISONING 


give milk. The victim should be kept 
warm. 

Shock is frequently present in all 
types of poisoning and must be con¬ 
trolled. The victim should be kept 
warm and if breathing stops, ar¬ 
tificial respiration applied. 

In poisoning from a sleep-pro¬ 
ducing drug, it is especially important 
that the stomach be washed out by 
whatever means possible, and a cup 
of strong coffee every half hour or 
so is also recommended. The danger 
that breathing may stop is partic¬ 
ularly imminent and artificial respira¬ 
tion may be necessary. 

There are a vast number of sub¬ 
stances which when swallowed or in¬ 
haled can be poisonous, such as in¬ 
secticides, polishes, sprays, cleaners. 
When poisoning is suspected, it is 
sometimes dfficult to determine what 
the poisonous substance has been. If 
the victim is unable to give the in¬ 
formation, perhaps an open bottle 
or his physical symptoms can help 
decide. In the case of some substance 
taken from a container, the con¬ 
tainer often but not always gives the 
remedy for poisoning. Some cities 
mamtain special bureaus which give 
information about poisoning and its 
antidotes, including all the new prod¬ 
ucts on the market which might 
conceivably be poisonous. 

Following is a list of some of the 
more common causes of poisoning, 
with symptoms and treatment. 

ACETANiLiD POISONING. Acetanilid, 
phenacetin, and Pyramidon are fre¬ 
quently constituents of headache 
remedies which, in sufficiently large 


doses, can cause death, especially in 
children. The person will have dis¬ 
turbed hearing or deafness, rapid 
breathing, blue lips and nails, nausea, 
vomiting, and sometimes convulsions, 
stupor, or coma. Vomiting should be 
induced unless the person is uncon¬ 
scious or has already vomited exces¬ 
sively. Then the universal antidote is 
given. Since respiratory failure is a 
dangerous possibility, artificial respi¬ 
ration may have to be given. When 
the doctor arrives, he may have the 
victim placed in an oxygen tent. 

ARSENIC POISONING. Arsenic is 
present in many insecticides, rodent 
killers, paints, dyes, and cosmetics. 
Small doses of arsenic taken into the 
body over a long period produce irri¬ 
tation of nerve endings. The person 
who has swallowed an arsenic prod¬ 
uct will have burning pains in the 
throat and stomach, and the odor of 
garlic on his breath. Other symptoms 
may be vomiting and diarrhea and 
extreme thirst with a choking sensa¬ 
tion. Vomiting should be induced, 
followed by an antidote of egg whites 
in water or milk, and the vomiting- 
antidote procedure repeated. After¬ 
ward strong coffee or tea is given, 
and then Epsom salts in water or 
castor oil. 

BARBITURATE POISONING. The bar¬ 
biturates include such well-known 
drugs as Luminal, Seconal, pheno- 
barbital, pentobarbital, Amytal, Dial, 
Ipral, neonal, and Evipal. Either in¬ 
tentionally or unintentionally people 
sometimes take overdoses of “sleep¬ 
ing pills,” which in many cases leads 
to death, and most states have laws 

589 



POISONING 


POISONING 


governing purchase of these poten¬ 
tially harmful drugs. Symptoms of 
barbiturate poisoning include head¬ 
ache and confusion, bluish color of 
nails and lips, uneven breathing, 
drowsiness, stupor and coma. Vomit¬ 
ing should be induced. The chief 
problem is to maintain proper breath¬ 
ing and to control shock. Strong cof¬ 
fee or tea is given and artificial res¬ 
piration if necessary. The doctor will 
make certain that the throat is free 
of mucus and that the victim is re¬ 
ceiving enou^ air. 

BENZENE POISONING. Benzene, a 
widely used solvent, is frequently a 
constituent of floor waxes, floor 
cleaners, varnish removers, and nu¬ 
merous other products. Benzene 
vapor is heavier than air, but when 
warmed it rises and spreads easily. 
A person who has inhaled benzene 
fumes will act, at first, as though in¬ 
toxicated, appearing flushed, dazed, 
and staggering. He will become 
drowsy and gradually unconscious. 
He should immediately receive fresh 
air and be given artificial respiration 
if necessary. In case the benzene has 
been swallowed, the person will 
breathe with difificulty and have a 
slow pulse. Nausea and vomiting will 
probably occur and maybe convul¬ 
sions. Vomiting is not to be induced, 
but strong coffee or tea given. The 
victim must receive fresh air and 
artificial respiration if necessary. The 
doctor will support the action of the 
heart with drugs. A victim of ben¬ 
zene poisoning must be particularly 
careful to receive adequate nutri¬ 
ments in order to buM up the blood. 

BORIC ACID POISONING. Infants 


have been seriously poisoned by mis¬ 
takenly being given boric acid solu¬ 
tions instead of water, although boric 
acid in ordinary quantities is not a 
dangerous poison. Vomiting should 
be induced, coffee given as a stimu¬ 
lant, and large amounts of alkaline 
drinks to protect the kidneys. 

COAL OIL OR KEROSENE POISONING. 

The first symptom of ingestion of 
kerosene is a burning sensation in 
the stomach, mouth, and throat, fol¬ 
lowed by nausea and vomiting with 
slow breathing and feeble pulse, and 
convulsions and coma. Strong coffee 
or tea should be given and artificial 
respiration if necessary. Vomiting 
should not be induced. If kerosene 
fumes have been inhaled, the person’s 
face is flushed or his lips blue, and he 
has difficulty breathing. He should be 
removed from the area of the fumes 
into fresh air, and artificial respira¬ 
tion given if necessary. Persons who 
work in an atmosphere where they 
inhale great amounts of coal, oil, 
kerosene, or naphtha fumes develop 
symptoms of “naphtha jag,” char¬ 
acterized by a sense of excitement 
and lack of self-control, followed by 
depression, headache, nausea, a roar¬ 
ing sound in the ears, irritation in the 
throat, and a trembling of the hands 
and arms. If sufficient fumes have 
been inhaled, shallow breathing, weak 
heart, convulsions, and death may 
ensue. The doctor may give anti¬ 
biotics to prevent pneumonia, and 
blood transfusions may be required. 

CYANIDE POISONING. Cyanide, used 
in the silver industry and in certain 
insecticides, is lethal in small quanti¬ 
ties and acts with extreme rapidity. 


590 



POISONING 


POISONING 


Hundreds of deaths occur each year 
from cyanide poisoning and in most 
cases it is difficult for the doctor to 
determine just how much cyanide 
has been taken. Treatment has been 
unsatisfactory because the poison is 
so rapidly fatal. Antidotes used are 
methylene blue, glucose injections, 
amyl nitrate inhalation, and sodium 
thiosulphate and sodium nitrite in¬ 
jections. Lavage with potassium per¬ 
manganate is also part of current 
treatment. 

The person who has swallowed 
cyanide has the odor of bitter al¬ 
monds on his breath, is confused, 
and has a headache. Vomiting and 
diarrhea are present, followed by 
convulsions, unconsciousness, stop¬ 
page of breath. First-aid treatment 
includes inducement of vomiting and 
drinking large amounts of hydrogen 
peroxide in water. 

LYE POISONING. Lye is a caustic 
alkali used as a cleansing agent in 
washing powder, drainpipe cleaner, 
and paint remover, and is a house¬ 
hold menace, especially to children. 
The person who has swallowed lye 
has bums and stains on the mouth 
and a burning pain in the mouth, 
throat, and stomach. Vomiting oc¬ 
curs. Vomiting should never be in¬ 
duced. The alkali should be neutral¬ 
ized with a weak acid such as diluted 
vinegar or citrus fruit juice—as much 
as the person can drink. The doctor 
may reopen the throat passage so that 
the person can breathe and swallow 
by using a rubber eyeless catheter 
which is gradually increased in size. 
Treatment to dilate the passage with 
this device may in some cases con¬ 


tinue for as long as a year. The doc¬ 
tor may also give sedatives to re¬ 
lieve pain and treat the local bums. 

MERCURY POISONING. BicMoride 
of mercury acts rapidly on the tissues 
of the body. In severe cases, the vic¬ 
tim suffers pains in the abdomen, 
vomiting. Egg whites and milk help 
to inactivate the mercury. The doc¬ 
tor may give BAL for several days. 
It forms an easily excretable combina¬ 
tion with the excess mercury. 

NARCOTIC POISONING. The victim 
of narcotic poisoning is drowsy and 
may fall asleep, pass into a coma, and 
die. Vomiting should be induced and 
strong coffee given as a stimulant. It 
may even be imperative to move the 
person about forcibly to keep him 
awake and avoid respiratory failure. 
Artificial respiration may be required. 

NICOTINE POISONING. Nicotine is 
a constituent of a group of insecti¬ 
cides. Ingestion of nicotine causes a 
hot burning sensation of the stomach; 
it is rapidly absorbed and may cause 
heart failure, convulsions, and respir¬ 
atory failure. Initially the person is 
nervous and excited, then depressed. 
He may suffer vomiting and diarrhea, 
breathe deeply and rapidly, and have 
pale clammy skin. Vomiting should 
be induced, followed by hot tea and 
burnt toast, or the universal antidote. 
Artificial respiration may be neces¬ 
sary and the doctor may give oxygen 
inhalations. 

STRYCHNINE POISONING. Some ca¬ 
thartics and tonics contain strychnine. 
Symptoms of strychnine poisoning 
are nervousness and excitement, stiff 
neck, and twitching muscles and con¬ 
vulsions. Vomiting should not be in- 


591 



POL!OMYEUT!S 


FOLIOMYELITSS 


duced except immediately after the 
poison has been taken. Burnt toast 
is given and the victim kept in a 
quiet dark room. The doctor may 
control the convulsions vdth bar¬ 
biturates and wash the stomach with 
potassium permanganate solution or 
tannic acid. Artificial respiration or 
oxygen may be necessary. 

THALLIUM POISONING. Thallium 
sulfate is an ingredient of some depil¬ 
atories. The symptoms are nausea, 
pain in the stomach, diarrhea, de¬ 
lirium, and convulsions. Vomiting 
should be induced and strong coffee 
or tea given. 

TURPENTINE. Turpentine comes in 
straight form, and floor polishes may 
contain this potential poison. Symp¬ 
toms are abdominal pain, nausea, 
vomiting, and diarrhea, and later ex¬ 
citement, stupor, and coma. Some¬ 
times the urine contains whole blood. 



Poliomyelitis—Child getting his inocula- 

tion agairsst poIiomyeliHs, With the dis¬ 
covery of the Salk vaccine the threat of 
poliomyelitis as a crippling disease has 
greatly decreased. 


Treatment includes inducement of 
vomiting, followed by Epsom salts 
in water and large amounts of water 
to promote urination. 

See also carbon monoxide; 

DEADLY NIGHTSHADE POISONING; FOOD 

poisoning; mushroom poisoning; 
LEAD poisoning. 

POLIOMYELITIS, an inflammation 
of the anterior horn cells in the gray 
matter of the spinal cord. It is caused 
by a virus, the smallest living ma¬ 
terial. Viruses differ from bacteria 
mainly in that they cannot move by 
themselves and caimot live outside a 
living body. The virus of infantile 
paralysis, or poliomyelitis, as it is 
more properly called, is one of the 
smallest known. Man is affected al¬ 
most exclusively, although monkeys 
may be infected. 

Poliomyelitis can exist in one of 
three forms. Many people have had 
poliomyelitis without realizing it, hav¬ 
ing contracted a mild case which 
rendered them immune to further at¬ 
tacks, Poliomyelitis may cause only 
a little diarrhea, stomach upset, cold, 
or muscle aches, which last for a 
few days. This is known as abortive 
poliomyelitis. If temporary paralysis 
of arms or legs occurs, the condition 
is known as nonparalytic poliomyeli¬ 
tis. The third type, paralytic polio¬ 
myelitis, may cause lasting damage or 
death if respiratory muscles are in¬ 
volved. 

Epidemics of poliomyelitis usually 
occur during the warm months, My 
to October in the United States, and 
February through April in Australia. 
The virus is present in the nasophar- 



POLYCYTHEMIA 


POLYCYTHEMIA 


ynx and bowel movements and may 
be spread by sneezings conghiiig, or 
by contamination of water or food 
with sewage® The poliomyelitis virus 
affects the ceEs of the spinal cord, 
braiiij and other nervous tissue, lead¬ 
ing to the familiar paralyses. Adults 
as well as children may be affected. 
Symptoms may be vague at first and 
include fever, headache, spasms of 
the arms, neck, thighs, and weakness. 
Treatment, which is not yet wholly 
satisfactory, consists of exercising the 
affected muscle groups to prevent 
withering and shrinking from lack of 
use; employment of the iron lung to 
carry on respiration when the respir¬ 
atory or breathing muscles are dam¬ 
aged, and other such supportive 
measures. 

Innumerable numbers of children 
have become permanent cripples as a 
result of polio, and many adults and 
children have died from it. 

The development of the Salk polio¬ 
myelitis vaccine has been a particu¬ 
lar blessing to all parents and chil¬ 
dren. The vaccine can produce 
immunity to the poliomyelitis virus, 
and this may last for many years. 
The vaccine is produced by growing 
virus on the tissue of the kidneys of 
monkeys. The virus is then de¬ 
natured, or killed, making it safe for 
injection into human beings. Even 
though denatured, the vaccine can 
cause the human body to produce re¬ 
sistant substances, or antibodies, to 
poliomyelitis. All human beings 
should be vaccinated. 

POLYCYIHEMIA, a disease of un¬ 
known origin in which the produc¬ 
tion of red blood cells in the bone 


marrow is greatly increased. The 
average number of red blood cels 
is about five to sk million per cubic 
millimeter of blood. In polycythemia, 
the number may reach as many as 
fifteen million red blood cells per 
cubic millimeter of blood. Usually 
white blood cells and platelets in¬ 
crease also, adding to the viscosity 
of the blood and affecting its flow to 
the brain and other parts of the body. 

The symptoms in polycythemia 
may include dizziness, severe head¬ 
ache, and a feeling of fullness in the 
head. In some cases, fainting occurs 
and numbness and tingling in the 
hands and feet. The person may feel 
irritable and sluggish and have occa¬ 
sional spells of amnesia. Sometimes 
the vision is disturbed and there is a 
constant ringing in the ears. The 
spleen becomes greatly enlarged in 
order to act as a storage reservoir for 
the increased production of blood 
cells. The person’s skin often has a 
bluish cast because of the prominence 
of small veins. 

Treatment for overproduction of 
blood cells with the consequent en¬ 
larged spleen may be done by x-ray 
of the entire body. Radioactive phos¬ 
phorus seems to be the most effective 
treatment, bringing relief for long 
periods. 

When great overproduction of 
white blood cells and platelets also 
occurs, other drags are effective. 
Blood-letting to releve severe attacks 
of polycythemia is sometimes prac¬ 
ticed, and has been found effective 
when thromboemboEsm is a compli¬ 
cating factor. In mild cases of poly¬ 
cythemia, periodic blood-letting may 


593 



POLYP 


posiyiE 


be the only treatment* However, there 
is danger of loss of iron and conse- 
quent anemia, in terms of hemoglobin 
content and oxygen-carrying capacity 
of the blood* Besides thromboembo¬ 
lism, hemorrhage and gout can also 
be complications of polycythemia. 

POLYPj a nonmalignant tumor 
which hangs by a pedicle or stalk 
from the surface of a body cavity. 
Polyps vary widely in structure and 
nature, depending on their location. 
In the ear, a polyp consists of granu¬ 
lar tissue caused by chronic irrita¬ 
tion. A nasal polyp contains a soft 
overgrowth of mucous membrane and 
generally indicates disease of the 
underlying bone tissue. A rectal polyp 
is usually a glandular tumor. Polyps 
are frequently found inside the si¬ 
nuses as inflammatory growth on mu¬ 
cous lining. A gastric polyp is a 
nonmalignant tumor in the stomach. 

Surgery is generally employed to 
remove polyps. In the nose, the base 
must also be excised after the polyp 
has been removed. Sometimes polyps 
occur in groups in the large intestine 
and must be removed and the en¬ 
tire area excised because of the dan¬ 
ger that one may have become malig¬ 
nant. Electric current is often used to 
remove polyps in the urethra. Polyps 
on the walls of the uterus may not 
require treatment unless they en¬ 
danger health. Rectal and gastric 
polyps also may become malignant 
and should therefore be removed. 

POSTURE,, position or bearing of 
the body. Good posture means that 
the body is held in the correct posi¬ 


tion when standing, sitting, lying 

down, or in motion. 

In standing, the ideal posture is 
one in which the person stands tall 
and erect, the abdomen drawn in, 
the shoulders square and high, the 
chin straight back and held in, the 
weight properly distributed on the 
feet, and the curve of the back well 
within normal limitations. 

In a correct sitting position, the 
body is erect and the head poised to 
bring the center of gravity in the 
line joining the bones of the hips, 
A constant bent posture or droopy 
position while at work or at rest re¬ 
sults in stretching and relaxing of 
ligaments, with a tendency toward 
permanent sagging. As a result, the 
back becomes rounded and the chin 
pushed forward. 

Good posture through life is de¬ 
sirable because it will prevent many 
disorders and help cure others. Both 
the home and school can cooperate 
effectively in training children to ob¬ 
serve the rules of correct posture. De¬ 
fects in posture can be corrected in 
preschool children if detected early 
enough. The teacher should always 
be alert to poor posture in pupils and 
take steps to single out cases for spe¬ 
cial attention. Physical exercise and 
posture training throughout school 
and college, and a program of physi¬ 
cal exercise in adulthood are impor¬ 
tant to good health. 

Faulty posture may be related to 
improper clothing and especially to 
the wrong kind of shoes, A definite 
relationship between flat feet, twisted 
spine, and other posture deformities 


594 



POSTURE 


POSTURE 


and ill-fitting shoes has been estab- 
Ished 

Exercises for Faulty Posture* The 
foEowing exercises are recommended 
for correcting ordinary faulty pos- 

tureo 

L The person with faulty posture 
should stand in front of a mirror. 
Another person should place his hand 
about one inch in front of the flat 
bone of the chest and push it for¬ 
ward to touch the hand, without 
swaying the body. He should try not 
to draw Ms shoulders back but keep 
them relaxed. Gradually the distance 
to which the chest is to be brought 
forward is increased by holding the 
hand farther away. Once the person 
is accustomed to the feeling of tMs 
exercise, he can do it without using 
a mirror. This posture should be re¬ 
peated untE it becomes easy and 


natural and can be maintained with¬ 
out strain or discomfort. The object 
is to acMeve a proper relation be¬ 
tween the thorax and the pelvis. 

After tMs exercise has been re¬ 
peated twenty times, the following 
exercises should be performed. 

2. Raise arms forward, stretch 
them upward, rise on tiptoes, and in¬ 
hale. Lower arms to the sides, slowly 
press the arms back, and exhale. 
TMs exercise, when done correctly, 
expands the chest, bringing in ail the 
extensor muscles of the back and the 
levator muscles of the shoulders. 

3. Stand with arms down and 
back, fingers interlocked, and palms 
out. Extend the neck, roE the shoul¬ 
ders back and turn the forearms so 
that the palms turn in, then down, 
and then out. Reverse to starting 
position and relax. TMs exercise is 




Posfyre-Fauffy posture can cause strain, pain and fatigue of the back. Correct posture 
should be practiced at all times Cnnks and pains in the back can be prevented if simple 
rules of back care are followed The photograph (left) shows the correct way to sit. To sit 
correctly the hips must be back in the chair, chest lifted, head high, shoulders relaxed and 
feet flat on the floor as shown. The poor sitting position (nghf) throws the body out of 
line and invites an aching back Note the crooked back, hunched up shoulders and legs 
twined around each other. 


595 



PREGNANCY AND PRENATAL CARE 


valuable for projecting the chest for¬ 
ward, stretching the shortened liga¬ 
ments, and drawing in the abdomen. 
Care should be taken to have the 
c hin back when the arms are brought 
down and turned out. When this ex¬ 
ercise cannot be done with the fingers 
interlocked, a handkerchief tied in a 
loop may be substituted and held in 
the fingers. 

4. Stand with the arms at the 
sides. Raise arms, stretch, inhale, 
bend forward, and rise. Lower arms, 
exhale. In this exercise the lungs are 
filled when the chest is in the most 
favorable position for expansion. The 
breath is retained when the trunk is 
flexed, forcing the air into the cells 
of the lungs, under pressure. The 
bending and rising employs the ex¬ 
tensor muscles of the neck and the 
retractor muscles of the shoulders. 

5. Lie prone on a couch with the 
feet strapped, or on the floor with 
the feet caught on the edge of a 
bureau or other article of furniture. 
Clasp hands behind the head. Raise 
the head and extend the spine, press¬ 
ing the elbows back. This exercise 
strengthens the back and shoulders. 
Follow with a deep breathing exer¬ 
cise. 

6. Lie in the same position as in 
exercise 5, arms at the sides. Raise 
head, bring arms forward, and imi¬ 
tate the breast stroke. 

In this exercise the spine is kept 
in static contraction, while the re¬ 
tractors of the shoulders are alter¬ 
nately contracted and relaxed. 

Additional Exercises. Here are 
some simple exercises which help to 
strengthen the muscles of the back 


and abdomen and thus improve pos¬ 
ture. 

1. Lie on the back, hands back of 
the neck. Take a deep breath and 
raise chest high; keep chest up and ex¬ 
hale by pulling abdomen in. 

2. In the same position, bend the 
knees and pull feet up. Pull abdomen 
in hard, and then relax. 

3. Sit in a chair, trunk bending for¬ 
ward from the hips, keeping spine 
straight. This exercise may be done 
standing. 

4. Stand with the heels four inches 
away from the wall but with the 
hips, shoulders, and head touching 
the wall; flatten the lower part of 
the back against the wall by pulling 
in the abdominal muscles. Holding 
this position, come away from the 
wall, with the weight well forward on 
the balls of the feet. 

5. Stand with hands on hips, back 
flat, and chin in; raise one leg for¬ 
ward without bending the knee; lower 
it; repeat with other leg. 

6. With head forward, clasp hands 
behind the head. Force the head 
back against their pressure, keeping 
chin in. This strengthens the muscles 
of the back of the neck. 

7. Stand tali, holding the back 
straight. Rise on the toes, with arms 
extended forward and up, stretching 
the arms and the body. 

PREGNANCY AND PRENATAL 
CARE. Pregnancy is the state of a 
woman from conception to child¬ 
birth, usually 280 days. During this 
time, many changes take place in 
the body of the prospective mother. 
While the greatest changes take place 


596 



PREGNANCY AND PRENATAL CARE 


in the organs immediately concerned 
with childbirth^ every organ is in¬ 
fluenced by pregnancy. When preg¬ 
nancy occurs, the uterus becomes 
thickened and enlarges with the 
growth of the prospective child. The 
breasts begin to develop as early as 
the second month and in young 
women who are having their first 
baby as early as the second or third 
week, A greater tenderness and full¬ 
ness of the breasts and a darken¬ 
ing and enlarging of the nipples is 
apparent. Various glands of the body 
are affected by pregnancy and pro¬ 
duce greater amounts of secretion. 
The whole rate of chemical changes, 
measured by basal metabolism, is also 
likely to be increased. 

Certain definite signs indicate to 
the doctor that a woman is pregnant. 
In the majority of cases, the regular 
menstruation disappears after the 
woman has conceived, and will not 
recur again during pregnancy. Dis¬ 
appearance of menstruation in a 
woman whose menstrual periods have 
always been regular usually indicates 
that she is pregnant. There are cases, 
however, in which a woman has had 
one or even two discharges of blood 
from the uterus after conception, but 
the quantity and duration are usually 
much less than normal. More fre¬ 
quent urination is often a sign of 
pregnancy. Some women will experi¬ 
ence a feeling of sickness, nausea, 
and vomiting, especially in the morn¬ 
ing. These symptoms usually develop 
during the second month and rarely 
last past the end of the fourth month, 
and many variations occur in their 
appearance, intensity, and duration. 


Some women are troubled several 
times a day, and in rare instances the 
sickness takes place only at night 
when the woman goes to bed. 

Many women become increasingly 
emotional during pregnancy, with 
feelings of peevishness, fretfulness, 
irritability, unreasonableness, and de¬ 
pression. Other women, on the con¬ 
trary, feel unusually cheerful. The 
craving for unusual foods is a mani¬ 
festation of the emotional changes 
that may occur, as is a change in 
daily habits. A woman who has been 
exceedingly clean and meticulous 
may suddenly become careless and 
slovenly. 

When the expectant mother is 
twelve to fourteen weeks pregnant, 
her abdomen wil begin to enlarge. 
At the end of sixteen weeks the en¬ 
largement of the abdomen will seem 
pronounced to her, although other 
people probably will not notice it for 
another month. The womb continues 
to enlarge in order to give room to the 
growing fetus. Between the sixteenth 
and eighteenth weeks she is likely to 
feel a faint fluttering, which is called 
“quickening.” This symptom is not a 
certain one, because things can occur 
inside the abdomen that resemble the 
movement of the fetus but actually 
stem from other causes. Women who 
are excessively worried about being 
pregnant frequently imagine that they 
feel movements. 

Some signs of pregnancy are so 
positive that they leave no doubt. 
One is an x-ray picture which shows 
the presence of the prospective child. 
Another is its heartbeat, which is 
audible between the eighteenth and 

597 



PREGNANCY AND PRENATAL CARE 


twentieth weeks and occasionally 
earlier. Laboratory tests are almost 
infallible. The Aschheim-Zondek tests 
(“rabbit tests”) are highly reliable in 
diagnosing pregnancy. They are, how¬ 
ever, expensive and only required in 
unusual cases. 

Once the condition of pregnancy 
has been established the expectant 
mother should talk to the doctor 
about prenatal care, for her health 
must be the best possible durmg 
pregnancy. Any disease or ailment 
she has must be known to the doctor 
to avoid future possible complica¬ 
tions for mother and child. Prenatal 
care is especially significant if she is 
diabetic or has heart disease. 

Fees should be decided in advance 
in a frank discussion with the doctor 
or obstetrician. Currently a lump sum 
for prenatal care, delivery, and post¬ 
natal care is common. If the child 
is to be bom in a hospital, arrange¬ 
ments for reserving a bed for con¬ 
finement should be made well in 
advance. Some families find that hos¬ 
pitalization and sickness insurance 
cover most of the expenses. How¬ 
ever, financial limitations need not 
and must not limit or prevent pre¬ 
natal care. Most hospitals offer 
classes which instruct expectant 
mothers, and fathers, in the care of 
the baby. The prospective mother 
should also discuss with her doctor 
whether or not her new baby is to be 
breast fed or formula fed. If breast 
feeding is recommended, the doctor 
will advise her in the care of her 
breasts. 

The expectant mother will see her 
doctor usually once a month, unless 


unusual symptoms arise, and more of¬ 
ten during the later days of preg¬ 
nancy. During these visits, he will 
make a complete physical examina¬ 
tion, which includes blood pressure 
and urine, to determine whether m- 
flammafions or diabetes are present. 
He makes accurate measurements of 
the organs concerned in childbirth 
and thus is able to anticipate difficul¬ 
ties which might arise. He examines 
her blood, one of the blood tests 
establishing whether or not the blood 
contains the rhesus factor. Blood con¬ 
taining the rhesus factor is RH posi¬ 
tive, blood which does not is RH 
negative. If the baby’s blood is RH 
positive and the mother’s is RH nega¬ 
tive, the baby may be bom with 
anemia and require a blood trans¬ 
fusion at birth. 

At each visit, the doctor will ask 
the pregnant woman about symp¬ 
toms, since certain symptoms may 
indicate complications. He should al¬ 
ways be informed of persistent head¬ 
aches, bleeding from the vagina, im- 
due swelling of the hands and feet, 
leakage of water from the vagina, 
blurred vision, abdominal pains, 
serious vomiting, fainting spells, 
scanty urine, and excessive gain in 
weight. If necessary, he will then 
determine the cause and significance 
of these symptoms in order to antici¬ 
pate and, in most cases, prevent seri¬ 
ous complications. 

The best way to help prevent com¬ 
plications in labor or delivery is to 
maintain good health and stamina 
throughout the period of pregnancy 
by proper diet and strict attention 
to the rules and advice of the doctor. 


598 



PREGNANCY AND PRENATAL CARE 



Pregnancy—The single, fertilized, human 
ovum IS shown m thirteen stages as it 
passes from ovary to implantation in the 
uterine cavity (above) The three models 
(left) show the uterus with the embryo at 
four, SIX, and seven weeks old The growing 
embryo, enlarged, is shown alongside At 
Vh and 3V2 months embryo grows rapidly 
(below) Placenta and cord are visible 





I* 


Pregticsucy-A model of a uterus 
with fetus at 414 months m a 
standing woman (left). The pelvic 
organs and skeletal structure are 
shown in relation to the uterus. 
They afford protection to the de¬ 
veloping fetus. A model of a 
uterus has been sliced open to 
show a 7-monfh fetus (bottom 
left). Babies born prematurely at 
seven months are likely to sur¬ 
vive. The abdomen of a standing 
woman with full-term pregnancy 
(bottom right} shows the position 
of a baby ready for delivery. 






DeilYery—A fylly developed 
baby rests v/ith head down¬ 
ward. The cervix is closed and 
the bladder is pushed up. 
Although delivery has started, 
definite "labor pains'' have 
not yet been experienced. If 
the baby represents the 
mother's first pregnancy, 
twelve or more hours may 
pass from the start of deliv¬ 
ery to the birth of the baby. 


Delivefy—The uterus is contracting and progress of labor has begun. The 
cervix is dilating and the baby's head presses downward through the opening. 




Delivery—The baby^s head emerges. The coccyx or "tail bone" 
back so that the body is streamlined to promote the baby*s exit. 


is bent 


602 




Delivery-Birth. While the shoulders slowly emerge, the doctor's hands 
support the infant's head. Breath begins with the baby's first cry. 


603 




Alferbirfh-The baby has been 
disconnected from the cord The 
placenta or “afterbirth,' ss portly 
separated from the wall of the uterus 
to which it has been attached After 
complete separation it will be 
expelled from the uterus 


Uterys—After the delivery 
the uterus is empty and has 
decreased in size Note the 
thickness of the wails now 




Uteriis-The appearance of the 
uterus on the fifth day after birth 
The uterus is gradually reluming to 
Its normal shape 



PREGNANCY AND PRENATAL CAiE 


The food supply for the baby reaches 
it through the blood vessels which 
connect with the mother. If her diet 
is deficient^ food cannot be extracted 
from her tissues and organs for its 
growth. Her food intake should be 
regulated with the needs of the 
growing child. A good general rule 
for her is to eat the foods she usually 
eatSs provided she has had a proper 
diet, but to make certain that she 
receives sufficient milk^ and more 
fruits and vegetables than she ordi¬ 
narily would. She should particularly 
watch her supply of vitamins and 
such mineral salts as calcium, phos¬ 
phorus, iron, and iodine. Milk and 
milk products provide most of the 
essential calcium, but the doctor may 
recommend additional calcium in the 
diet. 

Iron is absolutely vital for the 
building of red blood cells. That 
many babies are bom slightly anemic 
indicates that the diet of many preg¬ 
nant women is deficient in iron. They 
should be sure to eat plenty of iron- 
containing foods and, if necessary, 
take extra iron prescribed by the doc¬ 
tor. 

Of the mineral salts, iodine is of 
great significance. A lack of suffi¬ 
cient iodine in the diet may influ¬ 
ence not only the mother’s thyroid 
gland but that of the prospective 
child. 

She also requires more protein. 
Meat is one of the best sources of 
not only protein but also the B vita¬ 
mins, such as thiamine, riboflavin, 
and niacin. Fish, poultry, and eggs 
also supply protein. 

Fats, particularly butter, cream, 


and cheese, provide vitamin A and 
should be included in the diet. Sugars 
and starches, including whole-grain 
cereals, bread, and potatoes, are 
needed to provide materials for 
energy. But since fats, sugars, and 
starches also supply a substantial 
amount of calories, they should not 
be eaten in large quantities. Fried or 
greasy foods, heavy sauces and dress¬ 
ings, and rich pastries and pies 
should be avoided. 

The pregnant woman should get 
regular moderate amounts of sun¬ 
shine, if possible. If not, additional 
vitamins, A and D, may be prescribed 
in the form of cod liver oil. Fresh 
fruits and vegetables, particularly 
citrus fruits and tomatoes, supply 
vitamins A, B, and C. 

Cigarettes can be smoked in 
moderation—^five or six a day—but 
alcohol should be eliminated. She 
can continue to drink coffee and tea 
during pregnancy unless they cause 
sleeplessness. 

The nausea and vomiting that 
occur during the early months of 
pregnancy are sometimes helped by 
eating small amounts of food every 
two and a half hours rather than 
three daily meals. Various new 
remedies, such as Bonamine, compa¬ 
zine, Dramamine, and Marezine, are 
available to relieve continuous vomit¬ 
ing. 

During the months before the 
child is bom, the pregnant woman 
should wear comfortable clothing, 
and be careful not to wear elastic 
garters that constrict blood vessels 
and aid development of varicose 
veins. 


605 



PREGNANCY AND PRENATAL CARE 


Although the pregnant woman’s 
mental condition cannot affect her 
child’s physical condition, she should 
nonetheless a¥oM nervous irritation, 
undiie fatigue, and excess emotioiial 
reactions, not only for her own 
benefit but also for the sake of 
those about her. 

Medical care and advice are par¬ 
ticularly desirable during the last 
four or five weeks of pregnancy. Her 
condition for the confinement will be 
rechecked. Meanwhile the baby has 
grown to such a size that it cannot 
twist and turn in the womb any 
longer. It has settled into the position 
of delivery, normally with its head 
downward. If the doctor finds that 
these developments are slower than 
desired, he may attempt to correct 
the position by manipulation. He 
will also establish whether or not 
the space for passage of the baby is 
satisfactory. He will decide when a 
Cesarian section is necessary. 

A rigid or special program of self- 
care is seldom necessary for the preg¬ 
nant woman, but there are some 
hygiene rules she would do well to 
folow. She should, of course, keep 
herself well groomed. Social activites 
can and should be continued on a 
moderate scale. Pregnancy is no 
reason for becoming dull and un¬ 
attractive. As a rule, shoes with one- 
or l^-inch heels are better than 
higher-heeled shoes which make it 
more difficult to stand or walk com¬ 
fortably and thus give an awkward 
appearance. The doctor may prescribe 
a maternity corset to relieve stress 
and strain on the abdominal muscles. 
It should be well fitted and preferably 
made of a nonelastic material. Bras¬ 


sieres which lift the breasts upward 
and inward and do not flatten them 

are recommended. 

The pregnant woman always needs 
ample sleep and rest, in a wel- 
ventilated room, and especially dur¬ 
ing the last few weeks. An afternoon 
nap is desirable. If she cannot sleep, 
just lying down is beneficial. If she 
has difficulty resting, the doctor may 
give her some medication to promote 
relaxation. 

During pregnancy, small amounts 
of a liquid called colostrum, which 
later is followed by real milk, may 
exude and form on the nipples. It 
must be removed by soap and warm 
water to avoid irritation. 

The pregnant woman should visit 
her dentist early in pregnancy and 
follow his instructions for care of her 
teeth. 

She can continue to bathe during 
pregnancy, although many doctors 
prefers showers or sponge baths to 
tub bathing duiing the last month 
or two. The best temperature for the 
water is between 85® and 90® F., 
even for those who are accustomed to 
cold or lukewarm baths. Unusual 
types of baths, like Turkish and 
Russian sweat baths, ocean baths, or 
cold showers, should never be taken 
except on the advice of the doctor. 

The amount and kind of exercise 
that the pregnant woman takes de¬ 
pends primarily on her previous 
habits, but she should never exercise 
to the point of fatigue. As soon as she 
begins to feel tired it is a good time 
to stop. Walking is the best exercise, 
except in bad weather. It stimulates 
deep breathing, brings more oxygen 
into the lungs and blood, and assists 


606 



PREGNANCY AND PRENATAL CARE 


in proper elimmation. She should 
always walk slowly and avoid crowds. 
Two miles daily is an average amount 
of walking. Although sun is beneicialj, 
she should avoid too much exposure. 

Strenuous activities which require 
liftings excessive stretching or reach¬ 
ing are to be eliminated. Particularly 
undesirable are ranning^ tennis, 
swimming, skating, skiing, and horse¬ 
back riding. During the early months 
of pregnancy, dancing may be en¬ 
joyed, but the pregnant woman 
should avoid crowded dance floors 
where she can be bumped and 
pushed. 

If she likes to drive, short drives 
can be continued, avoiding rough 
roads and bouncing. During the last 
few months, traveling should not be 
undertaken if possible. 

As the birth of the child ap¬ 
proaches, all arrangements for its 
coming can be checked, such as 
accommodations, clothing, bassinet 
or bed, diapers or a diaper service. 
If there are other children in the 
family, arrangements for their care 
should be made. 

If this is the woman’s first baby, 
it is essential to be able to recognize 
the beginning of labor. Slightly pain¬ 
ful contractions of the womb will be 
the first sign. They begin in the 
lower part of the abdomen and soon 
spread to the front of both sides. 
After some time these contractions 
become more frequent and pro¬ 
nounced. A few drops of blood 
mixed with mucus may appear or, 
in some cases, water may flow at 
the onset of labor. 

At the first sign of labor, the 
woman should notify her doctor. 


since the time for confinement may 
have come. A woman bearing her 
first child, a primipara, usually has 
a more lengthy labor. When the 
contractions start to come every few 
minutes, the birth is approachijig de¬ 
livery. After the first baby, labor, 
in most cases, will be shorter so 
that particular care of the time 
element must be taken. There is no 
cause for concern if labor does not 
begin according to expectations. A 
few days’, even ten days’, difference 
in calculation is not unusual since not 
all pregnancies take the same course. 

The expectant mother should pre¬ 
pare to take certain things with her 
to the hospital, or have them ready 
for home care. The first few days 
at the hospital she must wear hospital 
gowns, but as soon as she can walk 
she is usually permitted, if she wishes, 
to wear her own bedclothes, slippers, 
and gown. Sanitary pads are supplied 
by the hospital, but sanitary belts are 
not. She should bring with her toilet 
articles she wil want to use, such 
as comb and brash, toothpaste and 
toothbrush, cosmetics, hand mirror, 
manicure set, tissues or handker¬ 
chiefs, watch or little clock, station¬ 
ery, fountain pen and pencil, and 
something to read. She should have 
indicated to her husband which 
clothes she wants Mm to bring her 
for returning home. The baby wifl 
need a shirt, a few diapers, cotton 
pads, a kimono, a sweater, a bonnet, 
bunting, and a blanket. 

If she has the baby at home, she 
can talk over with her doctor what 
she will need. Arrangements should 
be made for the services of a compe- 


607 



PREGNANCY AND PRENATAL CARE 


tent person to assist her—not a 
private ntirse, then a visiting aisrse. 
Most communities have agencies to 
help her choose. 

At home the mother will need the 
following articles for the baby: 

3 shirts, size 2. Cotton is preferred, 
since most homes are adequately 
heated. They should be large 
enough to slip on easily and not 
be outgrovm quickly. Those 
open down the front are most 
convenient, but slipovers pro¬ 
vide enough neck space to pre¬ 
vent squeezing the baby’s face 
when put on or removed. 

3 dozen or more diapers, size 20 
to 40 inches and of good quality 
(if a diaper service is not used). 
Paper or cotton-filled diapers are 
more expensive, but can be used 
once and destroyed and are 
convenient for traveling. Knitted 
soakers are preferable to rubber 
diapers or pants, but none 
should be worn constantly be¬ 
cause they irritate the skin. The 
silk-treated soakers are the 
safest. They should always be 
washed, dried, and powdered be¬ 
tween changes. 

3 nightgowns of soft outing flannel, 
27 inches long with drawstrings 
at hem and wrists and open in 
back. 

3 or 4 kimonos of medium weight, 
knit or flannelette, with little or 
no triimning. Simple dresses with 
“gertrudes” are preferred by 
some mothers, but kimonos are 
more practical. 


1 sleeping bag or baby bunting, 
which is a sleeveless square 
slip with hood attached, and 
zipper or tie front. It is useful 
out-of-doors for a baby bom in 
cold weather. 

3 pairs of soft, loose-fitting stock¬ 
ings, socks, or booties. 

5 blankets, 3 of them cotton re¬ 
ceiving blankets and 2 one-yard 
squares of wool. 

2 flannel, wool, or crocheted 
jackets. 

2 quilted pads for lap or bed 
protectors, or a square of rubber 
sheeting. 

The mattress for the baby bed or 
basket should be flat and smooth and 
not too soft. A pillow is not recom¬ 
mended except for use in the carriage 
with a young baby. Three to six 
muslin sheets are needed. An upper 
sheet is advisable to protect the baby 
against direct contact with the wool 
blanket, to which he may be sensitive. 
A rubber or plastic sheet under the 
regular sheet helps keep the mattress 
dry and clean. A hamper for soiled 
clothing and bedding is useful and a 
covered pan for soiled diapers is 
essential. 

A basket or tray is useful to keep 
small toilet items together. Toilet 
articles should include: 

soft bath towels and other small 
soft towels 

3 or 4 washcloths 

1 cotton bath blanket 

sterilized cotton 

safety pins (which should, of 
course, never be left open) 


608 



PREGNANCY, SIGNS OF 


PiEGNANCY, SIGNS OF 


plain ujiiiiedicated soap 
mineral oil 

co¥ered jar containers 
ointment and powder in case of 
diaper rasli^ as recommeiided by 
doctor 

Care shonM always be taken to 
keep all pins^ nippleSj soap^ and 
other small items^ especially powder, 
out of the baby's reach. Spilled 
powder is easily inhaled and can 
cause difficulty. Feeding utensils 
should include: 

covered kettle for sterilizing bottles 
bottle caps and nipples 
nursing bottles (the number needed 
will depend on the number of 
feedings to be given each day 
and the frequency of sterilizing. 
Bottles should be sterilized at 
least once a day) 

4-ounce bottles for water and 
orange juice 

PREGNANCY, SIGNS OF, The 
signs of pregnancy are those changes 
which can be objectively observed 
by a woman, her doctor or both. 
Early in pregnancy these signs can 
be confused with other conditions 
but in the last half of pregnancy 
there can be little doubt about a 
woman’s condition. Some of these 
signs do not occur in every preg¬ 
nant woman. Others, however, al¬ 
ways accompany pregnancy. 

Changes in the skin. From the 
beginning of pregnancy certain areas 
of the skin may become more heavi¬ 
ly pigmented. At first the pigmenta¬ 
tion is localized around the nipples 


and in a straight line down the 
middle of the abdomen. This is 
usually quite apparent about the 
end of the second month. Pigmenta¬ 
tion in the form of blotches may 
appear on the face, hands, or other 
parts of the body. When they occur 
on the face they are sometimes 
termed the “mask of pregnancy.” 
Wherever this pigmentation occurs, 
however, it is only temporary and 
disappears after childbirth. 

In some pregnancies a skin con¬ 
dition known as striae is found. 
Pinkish lines are seen about the 
abdomen, breasts, and thighs, 
sometimes producing a sensation 
of itchiness and superficial tender¬ 
ness. After childbirth the striae be¬ 
come white and almost unnotice- 
able. 

Rarely, but in some pregnant 
women, fine hair appears on the 
surface of the body, particularly on 
the face. This almost invariably 
disappears soon after pregnancy. 

Changes in the vagina and uterus. 
The lining of the vagina, which is 
a canal or tube leading from the 
uterus (womb) to the external ori¬ 
fice of the genital canal, through 
which the child passes into the 
world, becomes darkened early in 
pregnancy. The tip of the womb 
softens and the womb itself becomes 
softened and enlarged. A physician 
considering these changes along with 
symptoms reported by his patient 
sometimes can tell, with a fair 
degree of certainty, whether or not 
his patient is pregnant. 


609 



PiEGr^AMCY, SYMPTOMS OF 

Changes in the breasts. Nature 
prepares the breasts of a pregnant 
woman for nursing her infant. 
Whether or not she chooses to 
breastfeed her baby is another mat- 
ter. In any case^ the supply of blood 
in the breasts increases and the 
blood vessels become apparent 
through the skin. Toward the end 
of the first month of pregnancy a 
pricking sensation and feeling of 
weight are experienced in the 
breasts. During the next few 
months, a secretion gradually forms 
which toward the last days of preg¬ 
nancy becomes abundant and almost 
continuously discharges from the 
breasts. This is a whitish opaque 
substance called colostrum. The 
appearance of this substance is an 
indication that it is highly probable 
that the mother can successfully 
feed her baby. 

A second breast change occurs 
about the eighth week of pregnancy 
and is a positive sign of conception. 
This is a new growth of tiny'glands 
in the pigmented area around the 
nipples. These have the appearance 
of little protuberances and are 
known as Montgomery's tubercles. 

Quickening. The baby is in truth 
a living creature from the time of 
conception but its movements are 
first sensed by its mother about the 
eighteenth week of pregnancy. This 
movement is called “quickening”— 
or literally, coming to life. 

Increase in size of abdomen. In 
a woman of average size, there is 
a slight bulge of the lower abdomen 
at about the third or fourth month 


PREGNANCY, SYMPTOMS OF 

of pregnancy. This alone, however, 
is not sure evidence of pregnancy 
because a tumor may cause a simi¬ 
lar contour. 

Fetal outline and movements. 
During the fifth month the baby's 
movement can usually be detected 
by the doctor, by touch or by direct 
vision. By exploring the abdomen 
by hand, he can outline the fetal 
parts. The outline and movements 
are positive signs of pregnancy. 

Fetal heartbeat. When the fetus 
is four and a half months old, a 
doctor, listening through a stetho¬ 
scope, can hear the baby's heart¬ 
beats. These are distinguishable from 
the mother's heartbeat because the 
fetal rate is very rapid—approxi¬ 
mately 160 beats per minute early 
in pregnancy and a little slower 
later. This in itself is a positive sign 
of pregnancy. See also pregnancy 

AND PRENATAL CARE. 

PREGNANCY, SYMPTOMS OF. 
Symptoms of pregnanc> are those 
qhanges and sensations which be¬ 
come apparent to a prospective 
mother at the beginning of her preg¬ 
nancy and during the weeks that 
follow. 

Cessation of menstruation. Sys¬ 
temic disease or emotional disturb¬ 
ances may delay menstruation for 
five days or longer. When a woman 
has been fairly regular in her peri¬ 
ods, however, a prolonged delay of 
ten or more days can be considered 
good evidence of pregnancy. 

Frequency of urination. In the 
early stages of pregnancy, an in- 


610 



PRESBYOPIA 


PiESCiiPTlON 


creased frequency of urination and 
a feeling of fullness of the bladder 
are usual. This is due to the pressure 
of the enlarging womb on the blad¬ 
der and need not cause concern. This 
sensation disappears early in the 
pregnancy but returns during the 
last two months when the head of 
the baby is in the process of de¬ 
scending, preparatory to birth. 

Nausea and vomiting. A large per¬ 
centage of pregnant women experi¬ 
ence neither of these symptoms: 
about one-third have nausea only, 
and one-third both nausea and vom¬ 
iting. Some women experience these 
symptoms only in the morning, 
while others are troubled through¬ 
out the day. Nausea, when it does 
occur, usually starts about two 
weeks after conception but disap¬ 
pears in about four to six weeks. 
The intensity of this condition varies 
with different women. In some 
women it may persist for as long as 
three months but when recognized 
can be controlled by diet and medi¬ 
cation recommended by a doctor. 

Fatigue and constipation. During 
the early weeks of pregnancy an 
expectant mother sometimes com¬ 
plains of constipation and feels as 
if she were unable to get enough 
rest. Both these symptoms disap¬ 
pear, as a rule, in three to four 
weeks, in the absence of some com¬ 
plicating condition. See also preg¬ 
nancy AND PRENATAL CARE. 
PRESBYOPIA, a form of farsighted¬ 
ness in which objects close to the 
eye may be seen only with difficulty. 
Farsightedness is a change which 


normaUy comes with advancing years. 
First showing itself when the person 
is, perhaps, in Ms forties, presbyopia 
becomes progressively more acute 
until approximately the age of 
seventy-seven. 

Among younger persons, the lens 
is elastic so that it can make itself 
quickly globular in order to see 
objects close at hand. With age, 
however, tMs elasticity lessem, ffie 
lens tends to remain increasingly 
flat, and the nearest point of clear 
vision becomes farther removed from 
the eye. 

A person whose ‘‘point of con¬ 
vergence” is moving gradually far¬ 
ther from his eyes may boast of Ms 
ability to read auto licenses a block 
away but have to hold a book or 
newspaper at arm’s length in order 
to read it. 

In prescribing convex lenses for 
presbyopia the oculist will take ac¬ 
count of the patient’s vocation. Thus, 
a linotypist should be able to see, 
with ease, at a distance of twelve or 
thirteen inches, whereas a pianist 
might require glasses which are not 
quite so strong. 

The lenses, so prescribed, are not 
permanent and should be changed. 
The frequency of the changes can, 
in some instances, be limited, how¬ 
ever, by the use of certain exercises 
suggested by the physician. See also 

EYE. 

PRESCRIPTION, a written direction 
by which a remedy may be prepared 
and administered. Its four parts in¬ 
clude: (1) the superscription, which 
consists merely of the letter R, with 


611 



PRICKLY HEAT 


PROLAPSE 


a line drawn across the second leg, 
TMs sign is an abbreviation for the 
Latin word recipe^ meaniiig ‘^take.’® 
(2) The inscription, which gives the 
ingredients to be osed in preparing 
the remedy« (3) The subscription, 
which indicates how the remedy is to 
be compounded, (4) The signature, 
often preceded by the letter S, for 
the Latin signa. In this part the 
druggist is told what instructions to 
write on the outside of the container 
for the benefit of the patient. 

Prescriptions at one time often 
contained a large number of ingredi¬ 
ents, the doctor having prescribed 
something to cover all of the patient’s 
symptoms. Today drugs are more 
powerful and more specific in their 
action and so the doctor usually 
limits the number and is likely to 
include only a few ingredients in a 
prescription. He is more concerned 
with controlling the source of the dis¬ 
ease than with relieving all of the 
symptoms. 

PMCKLY HEATj medicaUy called 
miliaria, an acute inflammatory skin 
rash, characterized by acute itching, 
which occurs when the skin fails to 
adapt itself to an increase in temper¬ 
ature and humidity. Heat rash, as it 
is also called, affects children more 
frequently than adults. Newcomers in 
a tropical locality will often cease to 
suffer from prickly heat as soon as 
their bodies have become adjusted to 
the new environment 

TMs rash consists of smal eleva¬ 
tions containing a watery fluid. They 
are found over pores and occur be¬ 
cause the inflamed skin, usuaEy 


pinkish, prevents the perspiration 
from emerging in the usual manner. 
Often these eruptions link with others 
to form stretches of unbroken rash. 

Persons subjected to a hot and 
humid atmosphere often can avoid 
prickly heat by observing a few pre¬ 
cautions, Hea\’y clotliing should 
never be worn, especially by children. 
Frequent baths, followed by the use 
of a dusting powder, are desirable, 
and water or other liquids should be 
consumed in liberal quantities. 

If an attack of prickly heat does 
occur, however, it will ordinarily 
yield to standard treatments such as 
the application of cool packs to the 
area. The skin should then be dusted 
with an antiseptic and noiiirritating 
powder. Soap should be avoided since 
it is likely to irritate the rash. For 
cleansing purposes, a suitable oil is 
preferable, followed by the applica¬ 
tion of a sootMng lotion. 

If the rash persists, the person 
should consult a physician since the 
eruptions are a constant invitation to 
secondary infection. 

PROLAPSE, the dropping of an in¬ 
ternal body organ from its normal 
position, or the protrusion of the 
lining of a body cavity through a 
natural opening, or of an organ 
through a wound. 

At childbirth, the stretching of the 
supportive tissues of the uterus may 
produce prolapse of the uterus, in 
which the womb falls from the nor¬ 
mal position and the cervix is pushed 
far into the vagina. Severe prolapse 
can cause the womb to push the cer¬ 
vix through the vagina. This may 


612 



PMOSTATE 


PROSTATE 


provoke complications which re¬ 
quire surgery^ To correct prolapse by 
other than surgical means, various 
types of pessaries may be used, de¬ 
pending on the nature of the prolapse. 

Prolapse through wounds occurs 
in the case of the bowels or the lung, 
when the abdominal or chest wall is 
penetrated. Another example of pro¬ 
lapse may be associated with a per¬ 
forated comeal ulcer, where there is 
danger of prolapse of the iris, 

PROSTATE^ an organ in the human 
male located at the neck of the uri¬ 
nary bladder, surrounding the first 
part of the urethra, the passage 
through which urine is excreted from 
the bladder. 

The prostate is partly glandular 
and partly of muscular tissue. It pro¬ 
duces a substance called prostatic 
fluid which is an important part of 
the semen, the material that trans¬ 
ports the male sperm cells into the 
female during intercourse. Frostatic 
fluid is produced constantly and es¬ 
capes through the urine. During 
sexual excitement it increases in vol¬ 
ume and is discharged into the ure¬ 
thra and thus into the semen at the 
time of ejaculation. The exact func¬ 
tion of the prostatic fluid is not 
known, but it is believed to be re¬ 
lated to the survival of the sperm in 
the female vagina. 

The prostate is a gland with a 
minor function in reproduction and 
does not produce a hormone or other 
substance required in the body, nor 
does prostatic fluid enter the blood 
stream. 

Inflammation or infection of the 


prostate is not imcommoe and may be 
chronic or acute. Prostatic massage 
affords relief to men with chronic 
and subacute prostatitis. Acute 
prostatitis can become extremely 
troublesome. The desire to urinate 
increases in frequency and urination 
is painful. An abscess may form in 
the gland and not only give great 
pain at the slightest motion but may 
break into the urethra or other nearby 
tissues and have to be treated surgi¬ 
cally, Antibiotics and a hot sitz bath 
each evening are helpful in many 
cases of the various types of pros¬ 
tatitis. 

The most frequent disorder of the 
prostate is its gradual enlargement in 
men over fifty. Sometimes this is 
first noticed in increasing difficulty of 
urination; in other cases the first 
sign may be desire, even during sleep, 
to urinate more often. 

As the condition develops, a resi¬ 
due of voided urine tends to remain 
in the bladder. Eventually this will 
begin to decompose and irritate the 
whole bladder, leading to inflamma¬ 
tion. One recourse now widely em¬ 
ployed is the use of a catheter to as¬ 
sure complete evacuation, another is 
surgical removal of part or all of the 
prostate, and a third means is the 
use of glandular substances which re¬ 
strain its overgrowth. 

One of the most impressive re¬ 
cent advances in medicine has been 
the improved techniques for treating 
prostatic conditions. Surgery has ad¬ 
vanced from a two-stage operation 
which had many fatalities to the use 
of a tube, passed into the prostatic 
area from outside the body, through 


613 



PROTEIN 


PROTEIN 


which electrical dissection can re¬ 
move enlarged tissue. 

The prostate is especially subject 
to cancer and some authorities be¬ 
lieve it the commonest cancer of men 
since it accounts for 10 per cent of 
the deaths from cancer. Cancer arises 
in the prostate frequently without 
any symptom or warning, but be¬ 
comes evident in one of two principal 
ways. Difficulty in urination, much 
like that attending simple prostatic 
enlargement, may occur, and some¬ 
times blood appears in the urine. 
Neither of these signs is conclusive 
proof of cancer, but since urinary 
irregularity may signal a highly dan¬ 
gerous and progressive condition 
prompt medical attention should 
always be given. 

The other sign of prostatic can¬ 
cer is pain in the bones of the pelvis 
and thigh. This is caused by the 
spread of the original cancer. Medi¬ 
cal examination of the prostate 
gland, a simple procedure, and x-ray 
pictures of the bones will establish 
the diagnosis. 

Today cancer of the prostate can 
be treated with great success if it is 
recognized while still localized—that 
is, before it has spread. A rather re¬ 
liable means of insuring that if it 
does occur it can be recognized in 
time is regular prostatic examination 
by a doctor at six-month intervals 
for every man over fifty. The pro¬ 
cedure is simple and quick and is a 
form of life insurance. 

The only real cure of this condi¬ 
tion is complete removal of the whole 
gland before cancer has spread to 
other areas. However, new methods 


developed in the past few years make 
it possible to prolong the lives of 
those in whom cancer has spread to 
the bones and to relieve their suffer¬ 
ing. Removal of the testicles or ad¬ 
ministration of female sex hormones 
or both give many such patients 
twice the life expectancy they had 
before, as well as relief from acute 
suffering. 

PROTEIN, one of a group of com¬ 
plex nitrogenous substances of high 
molecular weight which are found in 
various forms in animals and plants 
and are characteristic of living matter. 
In the chemical makeup of the body, 
proteins occupy a significant place, 
being essential in the maintenance of 
tissue and also a valuable source of 
energy. In the process of digestion, 
the complex proteins, which are 
largely giant molecules, split into 
simpler forms and finally into amino 
acids. 

Amino acid contains carbon, oxy¬ 
gen, hydrogen, and nitrogen and 
some contain sulphur. Amino acids 
replace parts of body protein which 
are constantly being lost or destroyed 
through excretion. Some amino acids 
can be manufactured by the body 
from other substances but not in 
sufficient quantity to sustain life, so 
that the diet must contain essential 
amino acids if body growth and re¬ 
pair are to continue. 

Proteins which furnish essential 
amino acids in large amounts are 
called complete proteins. Meat, 
largely composed of animal protein, 
contains the most nearly complete 
edible protein. Plant proteins are 


614 



FiUilllS 


PSORIASIS 


generally incoiiiplete, and cannot sup¬ 
ply the body with enough of certain 
essential amino acids. Eggs, fish, and 
milk are complete proteins. 

Proteins have been classified into 
eiimerous groups, two of the signifi¬ 
cant ones being albumins and the 
globulins. Egg white is largely al¬ 
bumin, but also contains globulin. 
Blood plasma contains both. The 
ability of the blood to clot depends on 
fibrinogen, a globulin. Some of the 
antibodies which the blood develops 
to combat disease are also globulins. 

Every diet should contain two or 
more portions of protein foods a day 
to prevent amino acid deficiency. A 
diet high in carbohydrates and low in 
protein fails to supply the body ade¬ 
quately with amino acids and edema 
can result. See also edema; nutri¬ 
tion; VITAMINS. 

PMUMITIS. See itching. 

PSITTACOSIS, commonly called 
"^parrot fever/’ a disease not only of 
parrots, parakeets, lovebirds, ca¬ 
naries, pigeons, ducks, and other 
birds, but one also readily trans¬ 
mitted to human beings. Occasionally 
the infection is spread from one in¬ 
fected person to another. 

The infection is caused by a virus 
which can be found in the nasal dis¬ 
charges and droppings of infected 
birds and which contaminate their 
feathers and cages. The virus enters 
the human body by inhalation. Psit¬ 
tacosis usually appears sporadically, 
but outbreaks have occurred among 
family groups, employees of pet 
shops, and laboratory workers. 


In birds the liver and spleen are 
affected, but in men the lungs are 
usually involved. The disease may be 
serious, especially in older persons. 

Usually the disease begins seven to 
fifteen days after exposure to the in¬ 
fection with headache, sore throat, 
chilis, fever, and backache followed 
by a dry cough. In severe cases the 
temperature may remain high for two 
or three weeks. The lungs are con¬ 
gested and sometimes a large amount 
of slightly blood-stained spptum may 
be expectorated. Convalescence be¬ 
gins with a drop in temperature and 
is generally lengthy in severe cases. 

Psittacosis is one of the few virus 
diseases which yield to treatment with 
certain antibiotics. These also can 
prevent bacterial infections which of¬ 
ten follow an attack. Expectorants 
and inhalants may be prescribed for 
dry coughs and sputum discharge. A 
person who has psittacosis is ordi¬ 
narily isolated and anyone coming in 
contact with Mm is protected against 
discharges from cough or sputum. A 
wise precaution includes destroying 
the infected bird, and burning the 
cage and all materials that have been 
in contact with the bird. 

PSORIASIS, a chronic inflammatory 
skin disease, and one of the ten most 
frequent skin ailments. It affects both 
men and women, and usually appears 
after the age of fifteen. It is non- 
infectious, but some famflies seem to 
have a tendency to it. 

The cause of psoriasis is unknown. 
Numerous theories have been ad¬ 
vanced, but as yet no cause has been 
definitely established. Some doctors 

615 



PSYCHOANALYSIS 


FSYCHOANAIYSiS 


believe it is of nervous origin^ others 
think it maj^ be related to difficulty 
in digesting fat^ or to certain germs 
and viruses^ 

The first sign of psoriasis is gen¬ 
erally an eruption of pinhead-size, 
bright red spots which group to form 
larger ones, finally becoming great 
patches of reddened skin. The healing 
begins from the center and leaves a 
red or reddish brown stain. Also 
characteristic of psoriasis are thick, 
silver-white scales. When they are re¬ 
moved, small bleeding spots remain. 
There is seldom any itching nor is 
general health affected. 

Eruption is usually on the elbows, 
knees, and backs of the arms and leg; 
occasionally the chest and abdomen 
are involved. Sometimes the lesions 
become infected and form pus. Fin¬ 
gernails and toenails and the palms 
of the hands and soles of the feet 
may be affected also. 

Treatment requires patient careful 
management by the doctor and com¬ 
plete cooperation of the patient. Since 
the cause is unknown, treatment may 
be varied and tentative until the doc¬ 
tor arrives at the most effective 
method to treat a particular case. 

Psoriasis has been treated by diets, 
most of which seem to have been in¬ 
effective, with the possible exception 
of low-fat diets. Tar bath treatments 
have been helpful and many patients 
have improved with exposure to sun¬ 
light or ultraviolet rays following ap¬ 
plication of special tar ointment. 
Fowler's solution of arsenic, formerly 
used, has largely been replaced. Sev¬ 
eral special drags have been devel¬ 
oped for treatment of psoriasis. 


Chrysarobin is often effective when 
the palms of the hands and soles ot 
the feet are involved. 

Hormone injections have been 
tried; but unless peeling of the horny 
layer of the skin is excessive and 
widespread, there is not enough evi¬ 
dence of relation between glands and 
psoriasis to warrant the ose of hor¬ 
mones. 

Radiation therapy is often helpful 
in healing psoriasis, but cannot pre¬ 
vent its recurrence, and this treat¬ 
ment should only be used in special 
cases and with extreme care, since 
serious changes in the skm may occur 

Sedatives and tranquiliziog diugs 
have been found effective, especially 
in those cases which seem connected 
with emotional stress. 

Psoriasis in children must be man¬ 
aged with special care, since there is 
danger of absorption ot the tarry 
substances or other drugs, such as 
ammoniated mercury used in treat¬ 
ing psoriasis of the scalp. For this 
type of psoriasis, shampooing with 
salicylic acid, ammoniated mercury, 
and other substances is sometimes 
effective. 

PSYCHOANALYSIS, the method 
developed by Sigmund Freud to de¬ 
termine the patterns and motivations 
of human personality in order to 
treat various emotional disorders. 
Many persons, among them Jung and 
Adler, have worked in this field, 
modifying and changing the Freudian 
psychoanalytic method, so that many 
types of psychoanalysis are now prac¬ 
ticed. The technique is used in the 
study and treatment of a wide variety 


616 



PSYCHOSIS 


PyiEilY 


of emotional problems, particularly 
the neuroses. 

Typically the patient in psycho¬ 
analysis meets with Ms analyst a 
mininium of two one-hour periods a 
week, and talks as freely and fully as 
possible about anytMng he chooses. 
The patient comes to realize more 
and more what in his past and pres¬ 
ent life is relevant and significant and 
to discuss that. Gradually the psy¬ 
choanalyst and patient come to rec¬ 
ognize the roots and patterns of the 
patient’s attitudes and actions. The 
goal is to create within the patient 
both an intellectual and emotional 
awareness of why he thinks and acts 
as he does. Often an intellectual grasp 
of the problems precedes an emo¬ 
tional grasp—i.e., he may know that 
he drinks to excess when he is wor¬ 
ried, but still not have reached the 
point where this knowledge will serve 
to help Mm. Since neuroses have 
origins which reach far back into 
the patient’s life, the patient often 
devotes a large part of his attention 
to early cMldhood and adolescence. 

Psychoanalysis can take from 
months to years, the patient deciding 
when he no longer needs the services 
of his psychoanalyst. 

PSYCHOSIS, a severe mental dis¬ 
order, which manifests itself in ab¬ 
normal behavior, reactions, and ideas. 
The person is no longer able to cope 
with the demands of his environment. 
A psychotic person differs from a 
neurotic person in that the neurotic 
person has succeeded in making an 
adjustment to Ms environment, the 
nature of the adjustment usually con¬ 


stituting the neurosis. See also manic- 
depressive psychosis; neurosis; 
paranoia; schizophrenia. 

PSYCHOSOMATIC OISOMDEMS, 

illnesses which result from the in¬ 
teraction of mind and body. The 
emotional factor in sickness has been 
recogmzed since ancient times. How¬ 
ever, our imderstanding of the role of 
emotional factors and their inter¬ 
relationship with organic diseases has 
only recently advanced to the point 
that psychosomatic medicine is now 
a recognized and widely used term 
as well as a definite branch of medi¬ 
cal science. 

Psychosomatic disorders may re¬ 
sult from multiple causes where the 
emotional stimulus is combined with 
other factors, such as a physical pre¬ 
disposition. In ailments like asthma 
or colitis, for example, the site of the 
difficulty may be physically predis¬ 
posed, while the immediate source is 
emotional in origin. 

Psychosomatic disturbances may 
take place in any of the involuntary 
organs of the body, including the di¬ 
gestive tract, the respiratory region, 
the heart and circulatory systems, 
the genitourinary system, the endo¬ 
crine glands, and the skin. 

Certain forms of allergy are also 
greatly influenced by emotional fac¬ 
tors. In some instances chroMc cases 
of asthma have been helped by psy¬ 
chotherapy. See also neurosis; pep¬ 
tic ULCER. 

PTOMAINE POISONING* See 

FOOD POISONING. 

PUBERTY, the period in which the 

617 



pyBEilY 


PUBERTY 


physical form of the child is gradu¬ 
ally transformed into that of the 
young adult. These changes are far- 
reaching. Physical growth is usually 
rapid and the transition from child 
to tall gangling youth sometimes 
seems to occur almost overnight. 
Girls are a bit more precocious than 
boys in this change. The physical 
changes of adolescence frequently 
begin about the age of eleven 
(sometimes earlier) with girls but 
are likely to begin at thirteen with 
boys. Girls maintain this relatively 
advanced position in relation to 
boys during most of the high school 
years, but by the time college years 
are reached the difference is no 
longer apparent. Girls tend to pre¬ 
fer association with boys a bit older 
than themselves and this tendency is 
likely to persist into adulthood. 
Eventually they are likely to marry 
men a bit older than themselves. 

Growth in height is the most 
obvious of the far-reaching physical 
changes of the youth during adoles¬ 
cence. Full height may be achieved 
as early as the fourteenth year, yet 
some young people continue to 
grow taller into the early twenties. 
This depends, among other consider¬ 
ations, on the timing and rate of de¬ 
velopment of the endocrine glands, 
which include the ovaries and testes 
(the gonads). The hormones 
secreted by these glands bring about 
many of the maturationai changes 
of puberty and at the same time in¬ 
hibit growth in height. If puberty 
is rapid and the physical changes 
completed early, growth stops early. 


if there is a lag in the maturing of 
the gonads, growth in height may be 

prolonged. 

Girls at puberty begin to develop 
the contours of young womanhood. 
The breasts develop, the hips 
broaden, and they lose the earlier 
likeness to the more boyish figure 
of childhood. The internal organs 
essential to a womanly life, the 
uterus primarily, develop and the 
first menstruation is the definite sig¬ 
nal of approaching maturity. This 
sometimes occurs as early as age 
ten but may not occur until thirteen 
or even fourteen years of age. 
Girls should be prepared for this 
event. This preparation can best 
come from the mother, who should 
inform her daughter in direct terms 
about body structure and function. 
Otherwise, incorrect and distorted 
information may be received from 
other girls or may be fantasied. 

The approach of adolescence is 
heralded by the development of the 
so-called secondary sexual bodily 
characteristics. Hair under the arms 
and the public hair arc the most 
obvious developments. With boys, 
the beginning development of the 
beard calls for the first effort at 
shaving; a first shave at Thanksgiv¬ 
ing time may last until Christmas 
but soon heavier growth of the 
facial hair calls for regular groom¬ 
ing. The genitals of the boy ap¬ 
proach adult size and emissions in¬ 
dicate the development of the testes 
and achievement of fertility. 

The skin of the adolescent under- 


618 



POBEilY 


PUBEiTY 


goes characteristic changes. Sweat 
glands of more mature form de¬ 
velop; the skin becomes more oEy. 
Often acne appears and when 
severe causes the adolescent much 
distress. The adolescent is most 
sensitive to anything that can be 
interpreted as a defect or blemish. 
Under some circumstances, adoles¬ 
cent acne may cause intense suffer¬ 
ing. While this is only temporary, 
psychological advice and aid may be 
needed if careful cleansing of the 
skin alone does not keep the condi¬ 
tion under control. Some disturbed 
youngsters relate the occurrence of 
acne to masturbation. The practice 
should be explained as a temporary 
occurrence unrelated to skin 
changes that occur with all adoles¬ 
cents. Such an explanation will sat¬ 
isfy and assure the youth unless there 
is deeper conflict about masturba¬ 
tion. 

The girl’s reaction to the bodily 
changes that occur and to menstru¬ 
ation normally is one of satisfac¬ 
tion and pride. She begins to feel 
that like the. older girls she admires 
and (if she has a good relationship 
with her mother) like her mother 
she is approaching the dignity of 
young womanhood. This pride in 
self can only occur, however, if by 
example and by proper teaching in 
her own home she is able to antici¬ 
pate that her approaching woman¬ 
liness brings healthy promise for the 
future. Many adolescent girls are 
anxious and confused by the changes 
of adolescence. A girl may child¬ 
ishly attempt to deny or hide her 


physical development if she has not 
been helped to understand and 
accept her approach to adult femi¬ 
ninity. Disturbed attitudes of women 
toward the role of wife and mother 
are not infrequently reflected in the 
uncertainties of their daughters dur¬ 
ing adolescence about these roles. 
The healthy mother brings to her 
daughter her own assurance that the 
sexual, family, and social role oi 
wife and mother are sources of grati¬ 
fication to her and basically more 
important than other interests and 
activities. 

Boys, too, gain much satisfaction 
and pride from becoming large and 
strong, capable of physical per¬ 
formances that they admire in 
others and for themselves. The boy 
who early develops the physique of 
the football player is likely to have 
an easier time, in certain respects, 
than the boy whose physical growth 
is slow. If he actually remains below 
average in size and strength, he is 
likely to suffer. Most boys sharply 
compare themselves with others, 
are most sensitive to anything that 
might indicate they are less capable 
than their friends, particularly in 
sports. Boys are sensitive about 
breadth of chest expansion, strength 
of arms, and may be concerned 
about general appearances. Some of 
them go to extremes to overcome 
what they consider physical defects. 
Both boys and girls at times avoid 
exposing themselves in swim suits 
at the beach. Whether hips are too 
broad, legs too skinny or too fat, 
breasts too flat or too rounded are 


619 



pyiSE 


PULSE 


matters of undue concern for many 
uncertain adolescents. 

At times, boys and girls must be 
dealt with directly about their com¬ 
petitive feelings as reflected m ap¬ 
prehension about their own powers 
or appearance. The adolescent, when 
given proper opportunity, will ask 
questions about bodily changes; he 
will reveal his uncertainty and 
anxiety about his ability to measure 
up to others of his age. Since most 
adolescent anxieties center about the 
problem of his capacity to meet the 
demands of adult life, an approach 
to the seemingly simple matter ot 
how he feels about his own body 



l*iilse — Proper technique for taking the 
pulse. With the index finger, not the thumb, 
the pulse beat is found on the thumb side 
of the wrist and the beats are counted for 
a foil minute. 


his social and vocational uncertain¬ 
ties. See also adolescencl. 

PULSE^ the intermittent change in 
the shape of an artery doe to an 
increase in the tension of its walls 
following the contraction of the heart. 
The impulses which the beating of 
the heart sends through the arteries 
can be felt at various places on the 
surface of the body. The artery usu¬ 
ally selected for examinatioin of the 
pulse is the radial artery lying over 
the radius bone at the wrist. A finger 
is placed on this artery and the num¬ 
ber of beats per minute recorded. A 
machine which measures pulse rate 
has also been developed. 

In adults, the number of pulsations 
per minute varies from 67 to 72. In 
infants, the rate is 120 to 140 in the 
first few weeks of life, slowing gradu¬ 
ally to 100 to 120. 

Excessive rapidity of pulse rate is 
called tachycardia, and excessive 
slowness is called brachycardia. In 
fever, the pulse rate increases from 
8 to 10 beats per minute for each de¬ 
gree of temperature rise above nor¬ 
mal After exertion the rate increases 
but usually returns to norma! within 
a few minutes. Many long-distance 
runners have pulse rates as low as 
40 to 65. 

Normal pulse is regular, the beats 
occurring in the same intervals, in 
auricular fibrillation, the pulse is ex¬ 
tremely irregular. The force of the 
pulse may also vary in disorders as¬ 
sociated with a depressed physical 
state and with certain ailments of 
the blood vessels, See also arterio¬ 
sclerosis; BLOOD pressure; heart. 


620 




pywciyiE WOUND 

PUNCTURE WOUND. See 

WOUNDS, 

PURGATIVE, See cathartics. 

PUMPUMA HEMORRHAGICA, a 
condition caused by a decrease to 
below normal in tbe number of blood 
platelets, wMch are factors in coagu¬ 
lation. When a shortage of blood 
platelets occurs, bleeding will begin 
almost spontaneously, particularly 
from the mucous membranes in the 
nose and mouth. Bleeding underneath 
the skin is frequent, giving the ap¬ 
pearance of bruises. 

The number of platelets may be 
lessened as a result of some action on 
the bone marrow, in which the cells 
that form the platelets are manufac¬ 
tured. Fewer platelets may result 
from a decrease of the cells or from 
a toxic action that destroys these 
blood cells more rapidly than they are 
formed. Sometimes it is associated 
with sensitivity to drugs, such as the 
sulfonamides, quinine, barbiturates, 
or with the toxicity that results from 
the action of certain types of disease, 
such as measles, tuberculosis, and in¬ 
fectious mononucleosis. In many 
women, a lessening of the platelets 
occurs at menstruation. 

Purpura hemorrhagica is seen most 
frequently in persons between the 
ages of twelve and twenty-five, al¬ 
though it may occur at any age. The 
condition may develop gradually so 
that the onset cannot be determined 
accurately. Some acute cases are so 
severe that there is danger of bleeding 
to death within a few days or weeks. 
In others, the condition may be 


PUS 

chronic, varying in severity through¬ 
out the person’s life. 

Many different procedures have 
been used to treat patients suffering 
from purpura, often with the hope of 
at least improving the condition, 
since a cure is not always possible. 
One of the simplest and most direct 
methods is injection of blood into 
the body, either intravenously, into 
the muscles, or under the skin. Trans¬ 
fusion of whole blood is one of the 
most helpful treatments. The use of 
ACTH, cortisone, or hydrocortisone, 
in connection with transfusions or 
alone, has been found to modify rap¬ 
idly the bleeding tendency in many 
cases. Sometimes removal of the 
spleen by surgical operation has been 
helpful and is now an accepted tech¬ 
nique of treatment. Injection of hor¬ 
mones in connection with the opera¬ 
tion depends on the individual case. 
In many instances, a new chemical, 
vitamin Ki, supplements other sup¬ 
portive measures, such as replenish¬ 
ment of iron. 

Most of the management of treat¬ 
ment of purpura hemorrhagica is con¬ 
sidered experimental for the indi¬ 
vidual case, and for each patient a 
study should be made to determine 
the presence of an allergy to a pro¬ 
tein, and whether or not the dis¬ 
turbance in platelet production is re¬ 
lated to such sensitivity. The removal 
of allergens and use of antihistamines 
and other supportive measures has 
generally been helpful in the treat¬ 
ment of disorders caused by allergies. 

FUSj the thick, creamy, yellowish 
product of inflammation, found in 


621 



PYELlfiS 


PYO^tHEA 


abscesses. It consists chiefly of serum 
and white blood cells. The color 
varies with the causative microorgan¬ 
ism. A discharge containing or form¬ 
ing pus is called purulent. 

PYELITIS^ an infiammation of the 
pelvis or lower part of the kidney. 
In pregnancyj chills, fever, and pain 
between the hips and ribs may be 
indicative of pyelitis. See also kid¬ 
neys; NEPHRITIS. 

PYELONEPHRITIS, the most com¬ 
mon type of kidney infection, involv¬ 
ing both the pelvis of the kidney and 
the kidney itself. See also kidneys; 

NEPHRITIS. 

PYEMIA, an infection due to the 
presence of pus-producing germs in 
the blood stream and the formation 
of abscesses where these organisms 
lodge. See also bacteremia. 

PYLORUS, the valve which releases 
food from the stomach into the duo¬ 
denum and into the small intestines. 
Ulcers may form in the pylorus with 
subsequent scarring and constriction. 
Babies are sometimes bom with an 


enlargement of the muscies which 
forms the pyloric valve. This causes 
obstruction of the passage of food 
and spasms which result in vomiting. 
The child wll lose weight rapidly 
since he cannot retain food. The 
usual treatment for a congenital mal¬ 
formed pyloric valve is a surgical 
division of the muscle. 

PYORRHEA, usually refers to an 
inflammation of the gums and outer 
covering of the roots of the teeth 
when it reaches the purulent stage. 
It is easier to prevent than cure and 
rarely occurs when good general care 
is taken of the teeth and gums. Be¬ 
ginning with tender bleeding gums 
the inflammation advances until the 
teeth become loosened from the sup¬ 
porting gum. The dentist follows a 
regular course of treatment. If 
started early enough, treatment is 
effective, but when there is extensive 
bone loss and shifting of teeth in 
their sockets little can be done, and 
removal of the teeth affected is ad¬ 
vised in order to save the rest. See 
also GiNGmxis; teeth. 


622 



Q FEVERj often called nine-mile 
fever^ an infection which resembles 
influenza or virus pneumonia* It is 
caused by a rickettsial organism, a 
microorganism smaller than bacteria 
but larger than a filterable virus, and 
is transmitted to man by ticks that 
live on infected animals. Q fever was 
first recognized in Australia, where it 
occurred among workers in packing 
houses and dairies and among for¬ 
esters. Almost at the same time, a 
group of laboratory workers in Mon¬ 
tana contracted it. The outbreaks 
were apparently due to inhalation of 
dust contaminated with rickettsiae or 
by dried feces of infected ticks. 

Q fever begins with fever, head¬ 
ache, chills, malaise, and weakness. 
Mild cases last a few days, but more 
severe attacks may persist for two 
to three weeks; the condition usually 
ends in complete recovery. Treatment 
ordinarily consists of good nursing 
care and use of appropriate drugs 
early in the course of the illness. 



Q fever can also be acquired by 
contact with infected milk or dairy 
products, and proper pasteurization 
of milk is a significant factor in pre¬ 
venting the spread of Q fever. 

QUACKS, persons who falsely claim 
to possess medical knowledge which 
enables them to cure or treat disease. 
Fortunately today legislation has been 
passed which limits their activity, 
whereas formerly they had complete 
freedom to advertise through news¬ 
papers and radio, and to prepare and 
sell medicines. 

Persons suffering from illnesses for 
which medical science does not guar¬ 
antee a cure seem especially suscepti¬ 
ble to the claims of medical quacks, 
who will promise to cure arthritic 
conditions or cancer—^in fact, any¬ 
thing. Modesty is never one of their 
strong points, and usually there is 
nothing they will not claim to ac¬ 
complish. Their fees are often exor¬ 
bitant, but thousands of persons, out 


623 



QUAiANTiNE 


QUINSY 


of fear and guMibility, succumb to 
their wiles. Quacks can truly be said 
to exploit and live off the suffering 
and fear of others* 

QUARANTINE^ the limitation of 
freedom of movement of persons or 
animals who have been exposed to a 
communicable disease^ for a period 
of time usually equal to the longest 
incubation period of the disease to 
which they have been exposed. The 
word quarantine comes from the 
Italian word for forty. During the 
Middle Ages, ships were detained for 
forty days before entering port in an 
attempt to avoid spread of the 
plague. 

Today most countries are con¬ 
stantly on the alert to guard against 
disease-bearing persons or animals 
entering the country. For example, 
in England and Hawaii a dog cannot 
be brought into the country until 
after a quarantine period to assure 
that the dog does not have rabies. 

Persons actually sick are isolated, 
not quarantined. Every infectious dis¬ 
ease has a particular period of quar¬ 
antine and of isolation. For example, 
a child with scarlet fever is isolated, 
and members of the family are quar¬ 
antined, 

QUICKENING, the first feeling of 
fetal movements by a pregnant 
woman. These first noticeable move¬ 
ments of the unborn child usually 
appear during the sixteenth to eight¬ 
eenth week of pregnancy. 

QUININE, an alkaloid obtained 
from the bark of the cinchona plant. 


Is a drug used specifically in the treat¬ 
ment of malaria. In solution quinine 
may be taken orally, in another form 
it may be injected but usually it is 
taken as a salt, quinine sulphate, in 
the form of capsules, pills, or tab¬ 
lets. It is also Used as a tonic and as 
bitters, and has been helpful in cases 
of neuralgia and certain forms of 
muscle weakness. 

Quinine should be taken only un¬ 
der a doctor's supervision, as overuse 
may have a toxic effect. Atabrine, a 
substitute, is also prescribed as a 
specific against malaria. 

Another derivative of the bark of 
cinchona is quinidine, a drug that is 
valuable in treating heart ailments 
in which rapid or irregular beating of 
the heart is a symptom. It slows down 
heart action and lengthens the time 
of conduction of the heartbeat. It 
has been found particularly beneficial 
in treating fibrillation of the heart 
muscle. 

QUINSY, a sore throat caused by an 
abscess in the tissues around the 
tonsils. Pain is generally localized on 
one side. The person has great diffi¬ 
culty in swallowing and talking, the 
breath becomes unpleasant, the 
tongue thickly coated, and the sense 
of taste and smell may be affected 
and almost lost. 

Rest in bed is imperative and the 
physician will prescribe antibiotic 
drugs at once to relieve pain and 
control infection. Sometimes he will 
incise the abscess to release the 
accumulation of pus* See also tonsil¬ 
litis. 


624 



RABBIT FEVER, See tularemia. 

RABIESj or hydrophobia, an acute 
infectious disease of animals, caused 
by a filterable virus, and transmitted 
to other animals and human beings 
by the bite of an infected animal. 
It occurs in dogs, cattle, horses, 
wolves, cats, bats, and other animals. 
The dog is most often attacked by 
rabies, as well as being the most 
frequent transmitter of the disease to 
human beings. 

The first signs of rabies in a dog are 
irritability and restlessness, followed 
by difficulty in swallowing and paraly¬ 
sis, which makes the mouth hang 
open and causes drooling of saliva. In 
the final stages of rabies, an infected 
dog will howl, snap, run about, and 
bite. Eventually it becomes paralyzed, 
has convulsions, and dies. The dis¬ 
ease rarely reaches the last stages, 
since the animal is usually spotted 
before and disposed of. 

Rabies is caused by a virus which 



appears in the saliva of an animal 
several days before it has serious 
symptoms. When this virus enters 
the body of a human being, either 
from the bite of an animal or in 
another way, the virus affects the 
nervous system and eventually 
reaches the central nervous system, 
including the spinal cord and brain. 
Bites on the face, lips, and hands are 
more serious because the point of 
inoculation of the virus is nearer 
the brain. 

Epidemics of rabies have appeared 
in the United States from time to 
time. Reports of cases of rabies re¬ 
sulting from the bite of bats led 
recently to the discovery that many 
of the millions of bats inhabiting the 
Carlsbad Caverns of New Mexico 
either are or have been infected with 
rabies. 

Because of the terrible possibility 
of rabies, a definite course should, if 
possible, be followed after any dog 
bite. The animal should be kept con- 


625 



lAOIATiOr^ 


RADIATION 


fined for at least ten days and watched 
for signs of rabies* 

As a first-aid measure, a wound 
incurred from a dog bite should be 
washed immediately with a strong 
warm soap solution. Punctures and 
lacerations should be washed to the 
depth of the wound, using a blunt- 
tipped syringe* If a person is bitten 
on the face or hands, the doctor will 
begin to give antirabies vaccine at 
once, since the rabies virus reaches 
the brain and nervous system so 
rapidly* The vaccine most commonly 
available is the Semple vaccine. 
Sensitivity reactions to serum must be 



RadiCitioni—Patient being treated with ra- 
diocobalf for cancer of the tonsil* The ma¬ 
chine is odiysfed so the rays will strike the 
diseased area. Proper doses of radiocobalt 
will interfere with the growth of cancerous 
tissue but will not affect healthy tissue* 


guarded against, howevei, and a 
valuable adjunct to vaccine treat¬ 
ment is antirabies serum, especially 
for bites about the head, or severe 
wounds of the hand Vaccine is also 
given when visible wounds are known 
or suspected of having been made 
by the teeth of the animal, when pre¬ 
existent cuts and sores may have 
been contaminated by fresh saliva, 
and when small children who have 
had contact with the animal are too 
young to give reliable testimony. 

The doctor will usually discontinue 
treatment if the biting animal is alive 
and well after seven days of observa¬ 
tion. The onset of rabies usually fol¬ 
lows the bite of the infected animal 
in from twenty to ninety days, and 
during this period the symptoms may 
include restlessness, apprehension, 
and irritation and tingling at the site 
of the bite. When the disease begins, 
a slight huskkess of the voice is 
followed by a sense of choking, since 
the muscles of swallowing and breath¬ 
ing go into spasms. The infected per¬ 
son may refuse to drink water, be¬ 
cause of the pain that accompanies 
swallowing. Once the disease has de¬ 
veloped, it is almost certainly fatal 
in from two to ten days, the average 
being three days* 

The best general measure to pre¬ 
vent rabies is to have all puppies 
receive rabies inoculation as soon as 
possible. Most cities and communities 
have strict regulations regarding this, 
as well as a rule requiring that all 
dogs outside their home be on a leash* 

EADIATION, the therapeutic use of 
roentgen rays or radium* The term is 


626 



Radiotioii—Braio fumor in this patient is being focated by radioisotope radiations. This 
technique employs twin scintillation detectors that register radiations from previously in¬ 
jected radioactive boron, which concentrates largely in the tumor. As positrons emitted by 
the radioactive boron travel in straight lines but in opposite directions, variation in the 
position of the two counters gives a series of criss-crossing straight lines. The fumor is 
located exactly where the lines cross. 

also used to denote divergence from a x-ray as well as roentgenography, 
common center of sensations and which derives its name from Wilhelm 
stimuli, Roentgen, the inventor of the x-ray. 

Radiography describes the use of Radiation treatment is widely used 


627 





iADIATlOM SiCKNESS 


RADIATION SiCKNESS 


in medicme and includes the exposure 
of part or at! of the body to x-rays, 
or specific spots to radium and newer 
radioactive isotopes. 

The advent of atomic energy and 
use of radioactive materiais in in¬ 
dustry and medicine has posed many 
new problems because of the possible 
disastrous effect of radiation on living 
tissue. The United Nations Scientific 
Committee on the Effects of Atomic 
Radiation has been established to 
study this problem. See also x-rays. 

RADIATION SICKNESS, a condi¬ 
tion caused by exposure to radiation, 
as in radiotherapy or the explo^on 
of an atomic bomb. The symptoms 
of radiation sickness are mild to 
severe nausea, fatigue, diarrhea, in¬ 
ternal bleeding, and gradual loss of 
white blood corpuscles. 

Everyone is constantly exposed 
to minute amounts of radioactive 
materiais that occur naturally in the 
environment. However, this radiation 
is so small in amount that it does not 
have any significant effect on the 
body. Also, a certain amount of radi¬ 
ation may come from x-ray tubes or 
from the taking of various radio¬ 
active isotopes. For that reason vari¬ 
ous means have been developed for 
determining the presence of radia¬ 
tion in the atmosphere. These in¬ 
clude the exposure of photographic 
film and devices like the Geiger 
counter. 

It is now known that there is 
much less residual radiation from an 
atomic blast than was at first be¬ 
lieved. But a ground or water burst 
leaves a great amount of radioactiv¬ 


ity behind in the spray or dirt that 
spreads contamination as it falls to 
earth. However, even if absorbed in 
considerable amount, radiation is 

not always fatal. 

There is no immediate way of 
determining whether one has been 
exposed to radiation. Signs of radia¬ 
tion sickness appear later; how much 
later depends upon the amount ab¬ 
sorbed. If the absorption is great, 
symptoms may appear within a few 
hours. The initial signs arc nausea 
and shock, in the first day or two, 
the shock may be followed by vom¬ 
iting, diarrhea, and fever. There will 
be no pain, but the patient suffers 
from discomfort, depression and 
fatigue. This is often followed by 
a period of relative well-being and 
then by severe illness and death. 

Excessive radiation exposure dam¬ 
ages the body’s blood-forming or¬ 
gans and causes a reduction in the 
number of blood cells. Subsequent 
internal hemorrhage is due to the 
destruction of the thrombocytes, a 
blood platelet, and increased perme¬ 
ability of the blood capillaries. As a 
result, all bleeding, even from small 
cuts, is difficult to stop. Loss of 
appetite and falling hair arc also 
frequent symptoms of radiation sick¬ 
ness. 

In moderate cases of radiation 
sickness symptoms appear only after 
several days—in some cases two or 
three weeks. During this lime the 
mouth and gums bleed and there is 
also internal bleeding. Temporary 
sterility often results, but permanent 
sterility is not common because the 


628 



RADIUM 


RADIUM 



Rodiation Sickitess—Radiafion is measured in roentgens or "r's." The damage that radi- 
afion can inflict upon the human body depends upon the radiation intensify, the length of 
one's exposure to it# and the age and health of the exposed person. Over a period of two 
days, a dose of 200r would make some people sick, but cause no deaths; a dose of 300r 
would make most people sick, and cause some to die. A dose of 700r in the same period 


would cause death to almost anyone exposed. 

dosage necessary to sterilize the 
male sex gland is close to what 
would constitute a fatal dosage. In 
women, also, radiation may produce 
transient sterility; permanent steril¬ 
ity is rare. Exposure to radiation is 
best treated by the transfusion of 
whole blood, the use of antibiotic 


drugs to control infection, and 
forced nutrition, especially with 
foods rich in sugar and protein. 
See also atomic energy and med¬ 
icine; FALLOUT PROTECTION. 

RABIUM9 a highly radioactive ele¬ 
ment found in pitchblende and other 

629 



iALE 


mmerai deposits; it was discovered 
in 1898 by Pierre and Marie Curie. 
The rays which radium gives off have 
an effect on the growth of human 
tissue^ and radium has been effec¬ 
tively used in treatment of skin dis¬ 
eases of various types, including 
cancer, tumors, growths on the skin, 
and in hemorrhage and infections. 

Radium is generally employed in 
the form of one of its salts, since they 
are more stable than the element 
itself. Various types of tubes are re¬ 
quired for the insertion of radium 
into body cavities and tumorous 
tissue. Platinum or gold needles may 
be used, or tiny glass tubes, called 
**seeds,” which are filled with radon, 
a gaseous emanation of radium, and 
inserted into tumors, in some cases 
permanently. 

RALEj a French word meaning rattle 
and referring to the various sounds 
that are heard in the lungs when the 
doctor examines them with a stetho¬ 
scope. Many adjectives have been 
employed by doctors to describe these 
sounds, such as coarse, medium, fine, 
moist, and dry. 

MAT“BITE FEVER, an infection, 
characterized by fever, nervous symp¬ 
toms, malaise, and serious disability, 
which is contracted from the bite 
of a diseased rat, or, less commonly, 
a cat, dog, weasel, squirrel, or pig, 
which injects a spiral bacillus into the 
body of the person bitten. The bac¬ 
teria live in the noses and throats of 
rats without disturbing them, but 
cause a variety of febrile diseases 
when injected into human beings. 


Another condition like rat-bite 
fever is HaverhiE fever, so named be¬ 
cause the first epidemic which was 
studied occurred in HaverhiE, Vias- 
sachusetts. Since that time, other 
cases have been reported in different 
parts of the United States. It is also 
caused by the bite of a rat or some¬ 
times, by food contaminated with an 
organism similar to that transmitted 
through the bite. 

Rat-bite fever has been found in 
practically every part of the world, 
and occurs most often in infants and 
children. Not every rat carries the 
infection. In the United States the 
large and vicious Norway or sewer 
rats are the most frequent carriers. 

The incubation period of rat-bite 
fever ranges from one to four weeks. 
When the disease begins, fever comes 
and goes, fiuctuating from time to 
time, and occasionally a skin rash 
appears. HaverhEl fever has a much 
shorter incubation period and the 
fever does not increase and recede. 
The joints are involved, but if any 
skin rash is present, it is minor. 

Rat-bite fever is treated with 
penicillin, streptomycin, or the tet¬ 
racyclines. Other drugs are given to 
relieve headache and malaise. Most 
patients recover, particularly if the 
condition is diagnosed early and the 
treatment is prompt. Anyone bitten 
by a rat should immediately have the 
wound treated by a physician, who 
will cauterize the wound and treat it 
with a strong antiseptic. In case of 
abscess, he will incise and drain the 
wound; and if the puncture is deep, 
he may take prophylactic measures 
against tetanus. 


630 



iAT CONTROL 


RECTUM 


MAT CONTROL. Rats cause tre¬ 
mendous property loss each year, as 
wel as being carriers of diseases, 
such as rat“bite fever, bubonic plague 
through the rat flea, Weil’s disease or 
hemorrhagic jaundice, tapeworm, 
ringworm, food-poisoning through 
bacteria, and a form of typhus. The 
elimination of rats is therefore an 
essential part of any public health 
program and of concern to the private 
home owner or building proprietor. 
The best means of preventing rats is 
to make a building rat-proof by 
plugging openings, clearing away 
debris, and other measures. Once rats 
are established, they may be hunted 
or trapped, but use of poison is usu¬ 
ally the most practical means of 
getting rid of them. 

The ideal poison is one that will 
kill rats but which is harmless to ani¬ 
mals and man. Many poisons have 
been tried, with varying degrees of 
success. A compound known as 



Recfum—Sfryctore of the rectum and anus. 
The anus is the externa! opening at the end 
of the rectum. Strong rsng-like muscles sur¬ 
round the anal opening and are able to 
close it. The rectum is a common site for 
cancer. Cancer of the rectum may develop 
in either sex, but the incidence is greater 
in men. 


ANTU is effective. It affects dogs, 
cats, and other pets only mildly; a 
single dose wEl kill a half-pound rat 
quickly, but have little effect on a 
dog weighing ten pounds. One pound 
of ANTU is sufficient to kill 200,000 
rats. Finely ground corn or wheat is 
mixed with ANTU and sprayed or 
dusted on cut-up vegetables, toma¬ 
toes or potatoes, as bait. After the 
rat has taken a small quantity of the 
poison, its lungs fill up with body 
fluid and it dies by suffocation. 

Other poisons, more or less toxic, 
are also employed, such as zinc phos¬ 
phate and thallium sulphate. How¬ 
ever, rats quickly learn to be wary of 
food containing these poisons and 
will eventually avoid it. 

Two newer poisons have been de¬ 
veloped, warfarin and a related com¬ 
pound, toumarin. They are also 
mixed with edible bait and when in¬ 
gested by rats the poisons attack 
the blood and act as anticoagulants. 
The rats bleed to death internally in 
from five to six days. See also rat- 
bite FEVER. 

MECTUMg the lowest segment of the 
digestive tract, about six to eight 
inches long, terminating in the anus 
or lower opening through which 
solid waste matter is evacuated from 
the body. The large intestine, im¬ 
mediately above the rectum, first 
acts on the indigestible residue which 
remains when food has been digested 
and passes it on into the rectum. 
When this occurs, the body, by a 
specific mechanism, indicates to the 
brain that expulsion of the waste 
through the anus is ready. This is the 


631 



MB ilOOD CELLS 


iED BLOOD CELLS, DISEASES OF 


urge for movement of the bowels. 
See also digestive system; intes¬ 
tines. 

EED BLOOP CELLS* See blood. 

RED BLOOD CELLS, DISEASES 
OF* The red cell of the human 
being is a disc measuring about 
three-ten thousandths of an inch in 
diameter. Normally there are ap¬ 
proximately 5 million per cubic mil¬ 
limeter of blood. These cells are 
produced in the bone marrow of the 
body. The rate or type of production 
of red cells may be examined by re¬ 
moving a small amount of marrow. 
This is easily accomplished by in¬ 
serting a needle into an accessible 
bone such as the breastbone or hip 
and drawing out the marrow with 
a syringe. Slides are then prepared 
and examined under a microscope. 
A red ceil has a normal life span of 
120 days. A lengthening of this life 
span is unknown. There are many 
diseases in which the life span of 
the cells is shortened, however, and 
these are known as hemolytic ane¬ 
mias. 

The red color of the cell is due 
to a substance known as hemo¬ 
globin. Hemoglobin is an iron-con¬ 
taining pigment which has the vital 
job of transporting oxygen from 
the lungs to the tissues and removing 
the waste gas, carbon dioxide, from 
the tissues to be excreted via the 
lungs. 

When a red cell dies, hemoglobin 
is broken down into its component 
parts. The iron is utilized again for 
red cell production. A portion of 
the hemoglobin is converted to bili¬ 


rubin, a yellow pigment. If there 
is a rapid breakdown of red cells, 
the bilirubin may pile up in the 
blood stream and the patient be¬ 
comes yellow or jaundiced. 

Symptoms of anemia generally 
are the same, independent ot the 
type of anemia, but vary according 
to the severity of the disorder. 
Weariness, weakness, dizziness, ring¬ 
ing of the ears, spots before the eyes, 
pallor, and headaches are the most 
prevalent symptoms. If the anemia 
is severe, shortness of breath, rapid 
pulse, fainting, and even coma may 
ensue. 

Probably one of the most com¬ 
mon types of anemia is that due to 
a lack of iron. Iron is not excreted 
from the body. An iron deficiency 
in adults occurs for only two rea¬ 
sons: loss by bleeding and improper 
diet, in women, iron deficiency 
anemia is not uncommon. Loss of 
iron during menstrual bleeding, 
pregnancy, and breast feeding an 
infant nUy be quite severe. If a 
pregnant woman does not have suffi¬ 
cient iron stores, she will not be able 
to provide her child with iron. As 
a result, the infant may develop 
severe anemia at about the fourth 
to sixth month of life. The treat¬ 
ment is generally simple, consisting 
of supplying additional iron in pills 
or a liquid preparation. Iron may 
produce mild intestinal disturbances 
in some patients; this can usually be 
avoided, however, by giving the 
medication during meals. For men, 
an iron deficiency anemia indicates 
bleeding from a source such as the 
intestinal tract. The cause of bleed- 


632 



lED BLOOD CELLS, DISEASES OF 

iog most be determined because 
treatment of the anemia may only 
mask a primary disease. 

Megaloblastic anemia encompasses 
a variety of anemic disorders due to 
a deficiency of either folic acid or 
vitamin Bj2> When vitamin B12 or 
folic acid are not available to the 
marrow, production of red cells is 
deficient and abnormal. Red cells 
are larger than normal but the rate 
of production is definitely slower so 
that anemia occurs. Pernicious ane¬ 
mia is the most common affliction in 
this group of disorders. In this dis¬ 
ease, a substance called intrinsic 
factor, which is produced in the 
stomach, is absent and consequently 
the vitamin is absorbed. 
Pernicious anemia is accompanied 
by severe nervous system changes 
and if the disease is not diagnosed 
and treated early these changes may 
become permanent. Other mega¬ 
loblastic anemias may occur during 
infancy, pregnancy, and in severe 
prolonged intestinal diseases such as 
sprue. 

The anemia of chronic infection 
is similar to that caused by defi¬ 
ciencies. In chronic infections such 
as tuberculosis, the anemia does not 
respond to iron therapy. Toxic sub¬ 
stances released by the infection in¬ 
hibit the incorporation of iron into 
the red cells and also release of red 
cells from the marrow. The only 
treatment is treatment of the infec¬ 
tion. A similar type of anemia ac¬ 
companies chronic kidney disease 
and cancer. 

Hereditary spherocytosis or fami¬ 
lial hemolytic jaundice, is an inher- 


RED BLOOD CELLS, DISEASES OF 

ited abnormality of the red cel! in 
which there is a defect in the ability 
of the red cel! to utilize sugar. The 
red ceils take on a spherical shape 
and have a definitely shortened life 
span. The disease may be cured by 
removing the spleen. The spleen 
traps these abnormally shaped red 
cells and there they are rapidly de¬ 
stroyed. After splenectomy, a defect 
in utilizing sugar can still be observ¬ 
ed in the red cell but its survival is 
normal. 

Mediterranean anemia, thalas¬ 
semia, or Cooley’s anemia, is an¬ 
other inherited disease of the red 
cells. This disorder is most fre¬ 
quently found in persons of Italian 
or Greek origin. It is primarily due 
to an inability to produce hemoglo¬ 
bin and in its mild form may closely 
mimic an iron deficiency anemia. In 
its severe form, the person is jaun¬ 
diced, has an enlarged liver and 
spleen and severe anemia. Transfu¬ 
sion is the only treatment known 
to be effective. 

Sickle cell anemia is an inherited 
abnormality of the red cell in which 
the hemoglobin has a protein con¬ 
stituent different from that nor¬ 
mally found. The red cell may take 
on the shape of a sickle or a quarter 
moon. The cells have a short sur¬ 
vival time and consequently an 
affected person is anemic. This dis¬ 
ease is found primarily in Negroes. 
A symptomless form of the disturb¬ 
ance exists in which the tendency to 
form sickled cells is present but not 
enough of the abnormal sickle cell 
hemoglobin is present in the red cell 


633 



iED BLOOD CELLS; DISEASES OF 

to produce symptoms. Persons with 
this condition are said to have sickle 
ceil traits. If a man and woman with 
sickle ceil traits marry, their chil¬ 
dren possibly may develop a sudden 
and severe form of sickle cel! 
anemia. With proper care, persons 
with sickle cell anemia may live an 
almost normal life; specific treat¬ 
ment is, however, unknown. 

Acquired hemolytic anemia is a 
form of rapid destruction of red 
cells within the body. It is not in¬ 
herited and may be secondary to 
another disease. In this disturbance, 
a substance is produced which at¬ 
tacks and destroys red cells. Fre¬ 
quently a reason cannot be found 
for production of this destructive 
substance. Occasionally a tumor 
which produces the substance may 
be found. Acquired hemolytic ane¬ 
mia is not uncommon in malignant 
diseases such as leukemia and lym¬ 
phoma. Hormones such as ACTH 
and cortisone or splenectomy may 
be beneficial. 

Aplastic anemia is a disorder in 
which red cells are not produced. 
It is usually found after overdosage 
of radiation and exposure to certain 
toxic substances such as arsenic 
and benzene. The number of white 
cells and platelets also may be de¬ 
creased. 

Polycythemia is a condition in 
which there is an overabundance of 
red ceils. In one form, known as 
polycythemia vera, there is usually 
an increase of all cellular elements 
of the blood. The red cell count is 
between 7 and 10 million per cubic 


lED BLOOD CELLS, DISEASES OF 

millimeter. The blood volume may 
be increased from a normal of 5 
quarts to as much as 10 quarts. A 
person with polycythemia usually 
has a reddish glow' to his skin. The 
spleen frequently is enlarged and 
high blood pressure may be noted. 
The symptoms are due to the large 
amount of blood which is thicker 
than norma! and therefore cannot 
move through the blood vessels wdth 
normal speed. The most common 
complication is spontaneous clot¬ 
ting of the blood within the blood 
vessels. Proper treatment can be 
accomplished by frequent examina¬ 
tion and blood letting. Many pints 
of blood may have to be withdrawm 
to bring the total blood volume to a 
normal level. The use of radioactive 
substances has become important in 
treating this disease. Such agents as 
radioactive phosphorus will inhibit 
the marrow production of cells and 
thereby tend to maintain a norma! 
red cell level. The choice of treat¬ 
ment depends on the individual case. 
The most important factor is patient- 
doctor cooperation with frequent 
visits to the doctor so that the blood 
volume may be stabilized at a nor¬ 
mal level. The cause of this disorder 
is not yet known. 

Secondary polycythemia is usu¬ 
ally not as severe as polycythemia 
vera. It affects persons living at 
high altitudes and those with severe 
pulmonary or cardiac disease. Poly¬ 
cythemia in these cases is a result of 
oxygen deficiency. 

Certain aspects of the red blood 
cell are divided into many systems 


634 



RED BLOOD CELLS, DISEASES OF 


of so-called blood groups. The most 
importaot system is known as the 
ABO system. Another system which 
has received much study recently is 
the Rh system. Blood groups are 
antigenic; that is, if blood is injected 
into a person who has blood of a 
different group from that of his 
donor, a substance will be produced 
which will attack and destroy cells 
containing the donor’s specific 
blood group. For example, a per¬ 
son having blood type A has an 
antibody to blood type B. In the 
ABO system, antibodies occur natu¬ 
rally; that is, persons with blood 
type A have anti-B; blood type B 
has anti-A; and type O has anti-A 
and anti-B. The Rh system divides 
blood into two groups, positive and 
negative. About 85 per cent of the 
population is Rh positive and 15 per 
cent Rh negative. Antibodies due 
to differences in Rh factor are not 
naturally present. Injection of blood 
containing an Rh factor into the 
system of a person who has no Rh 
factor (Rh negative) will stimulate 
the body to production of an anti- 
Rh antibody. A first injection of Rh 
positive red cells will sensitize a 
person but produce no harmful 
effects; a second injection of ceils 
will be destroyed by the Rh anti¬ 
body. 

In hemolytic disease of the new¬ 
born (erythroblastosis fetalis) the 
mother is Rh negative and the father 
is Rh positive. The child will be Rh 
positive in this type of mating. 
Should some of the red cells of the 
child get into the mother’s circula¬ 


tion, the mother will become sensi¬ 
tized to Rh positive blood. During 
a second pregnancy, the already 
sensitized mother may again receive 
Rh positive cells and the antibody 
then will be produced in sufficient 
quantity to get back into the child’s 
circulation and damage the infant’s 
red cells. These damaged red cells 
have a short life span and as they 
are rapidly destroyed the amount of 
bilirubin produced from the released 
hemoglobin begins to pile up. The 
child becomes jaundiced and ane¬ 
mic. The bilirubin in a newborn can 
pass into the spinal fluid and become 
deposited in the brain and may pro¬ 
duce serious and irreversible brain 
damage. As only 15 per cent of the 
population is Rh negative, not every 
pregnant Rh negative woman will 
have a child with hemolytic disease 
of the newborn. The husband may 
be Rh negative also, in which case 
the child would not have the Rh 
positive blood group. The child’s 
cells must get into the mother’s 
circulation and this does not always 
occur. The doctor will check the 
blood types of both parents and if 
the proper conditions for the dis¬ 
ease exist, he will check the level of 
any anti-Rh antibody which may de¬ 
velop in the mother throughout the 
course of the pregnancy. Should the 
child have erythroblastosis fetalis, it 
may have to undergo an exchange 
transfusion which removes the bili¬ 
rubin and the dangerous antibody. 
Not every child will need this form 
of treatment since the severity of 
the disease varies from case to case. 


635 



iEOUCING DIET 


iiHABlLITATION 


Cases of hemolytic disease of the 
newborn due to the ABO blood 
groups have been reported; how¬ 
ever, they are usually very mild and 
require no treatment. See also 
blood; blood types; leukemia. 

REDUCING MET, See diet, re¬ 
ducing; OBESITY, 

REFLEX^ an involuntary movement 
or reaction to a stimulus, removed 
from the point of action. Many re¬ 
flex actions take place in the body as 
part of its ordinary functioning or 
in connection with disease. The knee 
jerk, an example of a reflex action, is 
absent in many diseases of the brain 
and spinal cord. The oculo-cardiac 
reflex is a slowing of the heartbeat 
that follows compression of the eye- 
baU. A slowing of five to thirteen 
beats per minute is the normal de¬ 
crease. When a substance is put on 
the back of the tongue, the swallow¬ 
ing reflex takes place. Laughter is a 
reflex to tickling, and when an infant 
starts on hearing a loud noise, a star- 
tie reflex is provoked. 

REHABILITATION. Until recent¬ 
ly a disabled person was allowed to 
remain in a bed or a chair with little 
or no effort made to restore him to 
useful function. Those whose con¬ 
dition was considered hopeless were 
tragically ignored, A person with 
paralysis or loss of speech from a 
stroke or disabled because of a frac¬ 
tured hip was allowed to pass away 
without much effort to encourage 
his recovery. Often attempts were 
not made to give him mental com¬ 
fort and encouragement. This situa¬ 


tion has changed. Although many 
conditions are still recognized from 
which recovery is uniikeiy, much 
improvement and peace oi mind 
can be obtained tor patients suffer¬ 
ing from these disorders. 

One important way to stimulate 
recovery is to prevent long bed rest. 
Patients arc urged to get out of 
bed soon alter an operation, some¬ 
times even on the day oi surgery, 
in heart conditions or strokes, how¬ 
ever, bed rest for longer periods ol 
time may be essential. As soon as 
signs indicate that activity ol a dis¬ 
ease has ceased, the ailing person 
IS required to get out of hcu. Any 
complications are avoided and re¬ 
covery is stimulated. After getting 
up, he must be encouraged to take 
part in as much directed activity as 
possible within the limits of his 
strength. 

An ill person must be encouraged 
to feel that he will recover, if the 
invalid feels that recovery is immi¬ 
nent, he will respond accordingly 
and results are more apt to be sat¬ 
isfactory. Pleasant surroundings, 
ample air, and a view of the outside 
ail provide contact with the world. 
A varied diet, consisting of well- 
prepared foods sei'ved invitingly, is 
most necessary. 

In the event of paralysis or loss 
of use of an arm or leg from a frac¬ 
ture, active steps must immediately 
be taken to restore tunction of 
affected parts. A physical therapist 
should promptly start such correc¬ 
tive treatment. Heat by diathermy, 
either from direct application or 


636 



RELAPSING FEVEt 


iEPiODOCTiON SYSTEM 


produced mechanically, often is nec¬ 
essary and motion of the affected 
part must be continued. Massage, 
continued movement by a therapist 
or by the patient himself, and elec¬ 
trical stimulation of the affected 
part all are helpful. Casts should be 
removed as soon as possible and 
physical therapy should be com¬ 
menced. When needed, assistance 
and aids for walking are provided. 
If speech is impaired, a speech ther¬ 
apist may often work wonders. See 

also OCCUPATIONAL THERAPY. 

lELAFSMG FEVER, one of a 
group of specific infectious diseases 
caused by spirochetes; it is char¬ 
acterized by recurring attacks of high 
fever. The disease is transmitted by 
the bite of ticks, lice, and sometimes 
bedbugs. 

Usually relapsing fever begins with 
sudden chills followed by a fever 
which may go as high as 105° and 
remain at a high level for several 
days, and headache and weakness 
may occur. At the crisis there is of¬ 
ten danger of collapse. After a few 
days the patient suddenly recovers, 
but in a week or so will again be ill. 

To treat relapsing fever, bed rest is 
essential, particularly during the 
period of high fever. Sponge baths 
and the use of salicylic acid and seda¬ 
tives help make the patient more 
comfortable. Antibiotics, such as 
Aureomycin, Terramycin, and Chlo¬ 
romycetin, have been found the most 
effective drugs in controlling this 
disease. 

REPRODUCTION SYSTEM. The 


human reproduction system, which 
consists of the generative apparatus, 
is discussed here with reference to 
its anatomy and to conception. 

Anatomy, One of the basic sex 
organs in the male is the scrotum, or 
bag, which contains the two tes¬ 
ticles. These produce not only the 
sperm cells, which fertilize the fe¬ 
male egg, but the cells which give a 
man his secondary sex characteristics, 
the deep voice, beard, heavier bones, 
narrow pelvis, rough skin, and fiat 
breasts. 

Each testicle has a long tube which 
leads to a separate semen reservoir. 
The sperm cels pass through these 
tubes to the semen reservoirs, in 
which there is a sticky white flu id 
provided by the neighboring prostate 
gland. This comb inatio n is known as 
semenr 

In semal intercourse, the external 
organ, the penis , becomes r^id and 



LPpiDN\ils 


TESTIS 

Reproductior* Sysfem-The ancifomy of 
the genito-urinary system in the male. 


637 





iEPRODUCTION SYSTEM 


iEPIODyCTlON SYSTEM 


is mserte d, jy the male into the fe¬ 
male's vagina. At the climax of this 
relationships the semen is shot 
through the penis into the vagina, 
close to the opening into the womb. 

The male and female sex organs 
are curiously similar. For example, 
the ovaries of the female resemble the 
testicles of the male. The female egg 
cells originate in the ovaries and 
pass into the Fallopian tubes, which 
resemble the semen reservoirs in the 
male. The eggs remain in these tubes 
a few days and then, unless fertilized, 
go down into the womb, or uterus. 
The uterus is a small empty organ 
which can be greatly expanded. From 
there the cells leave the body by way 
of the vagina during the female 
menstrual period. 

The entrance to the vagina re¬ 
sembles a small pair of vertical lips. 



VAGINA 


Reprodpctloi^ Sysfem—The anatomy of 
the genifo-urinary sysfem in the female. 


Outside these is a larger pair of lips 
which encloses not only the entrance 
to the vagina but also the mouth of 
the urethra, through which urine is 
expelled, and, in front of that, the 
clitoris. The clitoris is a small fleshy 
projection which, in sexual excite¬ 
ment, may become erect, like a tiny 
penis. The external female sex organs 
are known as the vulva. 

Conception, Conception of a hu¬ 
man being is an intricate event. In 
intercourse, the sperm cells are de¬ 
posited near the mouth of the womb. 
These sperm cells may travel further, 
enter a Fallopian tube, where one of 
them may meet with and fertilize one 
of the female egg cells. At once, by 
process of seif-division, the egg cell 
will begin to grow, feeding mainly 
on the food which it finds within 
itself. 

Leaving the Fallopian tube, this 
fertilized egg cell fastens itself to the 
inner wall of the womb. Soon, be¬ 
tween the wall and the cell, the 
placenta develops. This is the channel 
of communication between mother 
and child, but the blood of the two 
never intermingles. Each, in the pla¬ 
centa, will have its own, separate 
blood vessels. Other materials, how¬ 
ever, such as fluids and gases, are 
passed from mother to child through 
the walls of these blood vessels, a 
process known as osmosis, which per¬ 
mits the mother to supply the child 
with such essentials as food, water, 
and oxygen. The child may also use 
this channel to rid itself of waste. 

The placenta, together with mem¬ 
branes developed during pregnancy, 


638 



REPRODUCTION SYSTEM 


REPRODUCTION SYSTEM 


- 


OVUM 




\ 


TOP ^sew 


SIDE VIEW 


SPERM 



Reprodiicfiosi System—The sex cells. The ovum (egg) is much larger than the sperm. The 
inherited characteristics of the individual are carried in the head of the sperm and nucleus 
of the ovum. One sperm will attach itself to the egg wall; it loses its tail and its head pene¬ 
trates into the interior of the egg. When the head fuses with the nucleus of the egg, fertili¬ 
zation is said to have taken place and the first cell of o new individual is formed. 


is eliminated after the birth of the 
child, in the ‘^afterbirth.” 

The new human being may be said 
to exist as soon as the sperm cell has 
fertilized the egg cell, at which time 
the sex is determined. The best es¬ 
tablished theory maintains that every 
cell in the body of a female contains 
two chromosomes, or sex deter¬ 
miners, whereas each cell in the body 
of the male has only one. However, 
when the female produces egg cells, 
only one determiner will be found in 
each. When the male develops sperm 
cells, half of them contain one deter¬ 
miner each, while the rest do not 
contain any. If the sperm cell which 


fertilizes the egg cell happens to con¬ 
tain a determiner, the result will be 
a fertilized egg cell with two deter¬ 
miners and the child will be female. 
However, if the fertilizing sperm cell 
does not contain any determiner, the 
child, possessing only the one de¬ 
terminer, will be male. 

This theory is generally accepted. 
Therefore, neither parents nor doc¬ 
tors could ever conceivably control 
the sex of the child. Moreover, as yet, 
there is not a scientific means of 
determining, before birth, whether or 
not the child is male or female. See 
also cervix; contraception; ova- 


RESERPINE 


RESUSCITATION 


RIES; PREGNANCY AND PRENATAL 

care; testicles; uterus^ 

EESERPMEs a new alkaloid drug 
wMcli has proved useful against high 
blood pressure and in relieving the 
symptoms of acute mental disorders. 
The substance is derived from rau- 
wolfia serpentina^ a root from which 
extracts have been used in India for 
many centuries for a variety of medi¬ 
cal purposes. Reserpine is a specific 
substance isolated from the root and 
believed to be the active principle to 
which the therapeutic effects are due. 
In India rauwolfia is a widely used 
sedative and was employed against 
snakebite and other conditions many 
centuries ago. See also barbiturates. 

RESPIRATORY DISEASES^ those 
disorders which affect the act of 
breathing with the lungs or the appa¬ 
ratus, the organs, tissues, and mem¬ 
branes, involved. The respiratory sys¬ 
tem in the human being is chiefly 
composed of two lungs and the air 
passages which lead to them. See also 


COMMON cold; lungs; pneumonia; 

TUBERCULOSIS. 

RESUSCITATION, the prevention 
of asphyxial death by artificial res¬ 
piration. Unconsciousoess is always 
an emergency sitiiatioii. It can occur 
from inhalation of carbon monoxide, 
drowning, poisoning, electric shock, 
and other causes. Although various 
devices for artificial respiration are 
effective, manual artificial respiration 
is usually the most readily available, 
and unconsciousness requires im¬ 
mediate first-aid trealnnent. 

The average person breathes from 
sixteen to twenty times a minute. 
However, most authorities believe 
that in artificial respiration a greater 
number of movements are necessary, 
since the patient will take in less than 
the normal amount of air in each 
breath. Some recommend that the 
rate be between twenty-four and 
forty movements per minute. 

Until recently the most commonly 
practiced method of resuscitation was 


Resuscitcitiosi—The arm lift-back pressure method of manual artificiol respirotion (after 
Holger Nielsen). A, placing hands for arm lift. B, arm lift, the operator rocking backward. 
C, placing hands for back pressure, D, back pressure, the oporofor rocking forward. 





Restfscitafion—The hip roll-back pressure method of manual artificial respi-rafion. The 
operator^ kneeling astride the subject, uses the knee on which he is kneeling as a fulcrum 
on which to roll the victim. A, side view of hip roll. B, front view of hip roil. 


the Schaefer technique, named for 
the British physiologist who devised 
it. Another method, the Holger 
method, was then adopted by the 
American Red Cross, the American 
Medical Association, and other agen¬ 
cies. This procedure has now been re¬ 
placed by mouth to mouth resuscita¬ 
tion. 

The Holger method. The uncon¬ 
scious person is placed face down, 
with the hands on top of each other, 
the forehead resting on the hands 
with the face turned slightly to one 
side, and the elbows extended out¬ 


ward. The operator kneels on one or 
both knees in front of the head of 
the victim. He places his hands under 
the victim’s arms, above the elbow, 
and rocks backward, drawing the 
arms upward and toward himself. 
The arms are elevated until firm re¬ 
sistance is met, then replaced on the 
floor. The operator then moves Ms 
hands to the back, just below the 
shoulder blades, and rocks forward, 
exerting pressure on the back. The 
operator’s arms are kept straight dur¬ 
ing both the lift and the pressure 
phases, and the complete cycle is re- 


Reswscifcifioti—The hip lift-back pressure method of manual artificial respiration. This 
method combines alternate lifting of hips with pressure on mid-back below shoulder blades. 
A, placing hands for hip lift. B, hip lift. C, placing hands for back pressure. D, back pressure. 







Resyseitati©si~The mouth-to-mouth method of artificia( re-iptration. After removing foreign 
matter, if any, from mouth, liit subfect's head back so chin points upward (Fig 1|. Thrust jaw 
info jutting-out position to clear base of tongue from throat {Fig. 2, 3). Place wide-open 
mouth tightly over victim's mouth, pinching victim's nostrils shut fFEg. 4); victim's nostrils 
may also be closed by operator's cheek (Fig. 5). Mouth-to-nose method may be used by 
closing victim's mouth and breathing into victim's nose (Fig. 6) instead of info mouth. If 
after first blowing efforts there is no air exchange, and recheck of head and javr position does 
not induce breathing, victim should be turned quickly on side and given sharp blows 
between shoulder blades to dislodge foreign matter (Fig. 7), Victim's mouth should then be 
rechecked for obstructions. For an adult, the rote should be about 12 breaths, vigorously 
administered, per minute. 


peated about ten to twelve times a 
minute. 

Eip lift. The unconscious person 
is placed in a prone position face 
down. The operator kneels on one 
knee near the victim’s hip, straddles 
the victim, and places the other foot 
near the opposite hip. He places his 
hands under the hips, and raises the 
pelvis vertically upward four to six 
inches. The hips are then replaced 


on the ground and the cycle is re¬ 
peated. The hip lift is performed 
twelve times per minute. Lifting the 
hips produces active inspiration, as a 
result of several mechanisms: (!) 
When the hips are elevated, the ab¬ 
dominal contents sag downward to¬ 
ward the floor and result in an intra- 
abdominal negativity that tends to 
draw the diaphragm downward. (2) 
Because of the ligamentous attach- 



RESUSCITATION 


iESUSClTATlON 


ments between the viscera and dia- 
phragnij the downward movement 
of the abdominal organs is followed 
by a similar action of the diaphragm. 
(3) Elevating the hips hyperextends 
the spine and increases the intercostal 
spaces of the lower ribs. 

Hip lift-back pressure. The hip 
iift“back pressure method combines 
alternate lifting of the hips, as de¬ 
scribed, with pressure on the mid- 
back just below the shoulder blades, 
with the fingers spread and the 
thumbs about an inch from the 
spine. As the operator lifts the hips 
he rocks backward, and as he exerts 
back pressure he rocks forward. In 
each phase he keeps his arms straight, 
so that the work of lifting and press¬ 
ing is distributed over the shoulders 
and back, rather than being imposed 
primarily on the arms. 


Hip roll-back pressure. This is a 
modification of the hip lift-back pres¬ 
sure method in which a roll is sub¬ 
stituted for the lift in order to in¬ 
crease the ease of performance. The 
operator kneels astride the prone sub¬ 
ject as described for the hip lift 
method. Instead of lifting both hips, 
he uses the knee on which he is kneel¬ 
ing as a fulcrum on which to roll the 
victim. The operator keeps Ms arms 
straight, and rolls Mmself in the 
same direction in which he rolls the 
victim. Great care must be exercised 
to insure that the victim is rolled up 
onto the operator’s knee or tMgh, so 
that both Mps are raised from the 
ground. 

Mouth-to-mouth method. The Red 
Cross has recently revived an ancient 
method of artificial resuscitation "as 
the best way of reviving infants and 


Resiiscitation—Moufh-to-mouth method of artificial respiration for infants and small 
children. After the child's mouth and air passages are cleared of foreign matter/ the child 
should be placed on his back and the lower jaw lifted from beneath and behind into julting- 
out position (Fig. 1). Then place your mouth over both the child's mouth and nose, breathing 
into them at the rate of about 20 breaths per minute (Fig. 2). If the child's air passages 
remain blocked, he should be held up a moment by the ankles (Fig. 3) or bent over one arm 
(Fig. 4} and given a few sharp pats between shoulder blades to dislodge any obstructions. 




lETINA 


iHEUMATlC FEVER 


children whose breathing has 
stopped. This method is known as 
mouth-to-mouth resuscitation, and 
replaces the back pressure-arm lift 
method. 

Following are steps in the mouth- 
to-mouth technique, 

L Clear the mouth of foreign mat¬ 
ter with the middle finger of one 
hand, and with the same finger hold 
the tongue forward, 

2. Place the child in a face-down, 
head-down position, and pat Mm 
firmly on the back with the free hand. 
This should help dislodge any foreign 
object in the air passages. 

3. Place the child on his back and 
use the middle fingers of both hands 
to lift the lower jaw from beneath 
and behind so that it “juts out,” 

4. Hold the jaw in this position, 
using one hand only. 

5. Place your mouth over the 
child’s mouth and nose, making a 
relatively leakproof seal, and breathe 
into the child with a smooth steady 
action until you observe the chest 
rise. As you start this action, move 
the free hand to the child’s abdomen, 
between the navel and the ribs, and 
apply continuous moderate pressure 
to prevent the stomach from becom¬ 
ing filled with air. 

6 . When the lungs have been in¬ 
flated, remove your lips from the 
child’s mouth and nose and allow the 
lungs to empty. Repeat this cycle, 
keeping one hand beneath the jaw 
and the other hand pressing on the 
stomach at all times. Continue at a 
rate of about twenty cycles a minute. 
If at any time resistance to hreatMng 
into the cMM is felt and the chest 


does not rise, repeat second step, 
then quickly resume mouth-fo-oiouth 

breathing. 

EETMAj the iight-receptive layer 
and terminal expansion of the optic 
nerve, the eye. Vision is accom¬ 
plished through the passing of light 
rays through the human eye to the 
nervous tissue at the back of the eye, 
called the retina. A serious disorder 
of the retina is detachment of the 
retina, a condition in which small 
areas of the retina separate from the 
underlying coats, usually as the re¬ 
sult of injury, infection, or tumor 
and, sometimes, as a result of a dis¬ 
ease, such as tuberculosis. An opera¬ 
tive procedure has been developed 
in retinal detachment. 

Inflammation of the retina is called 
retinitis, which may be due to in¬ 
fection, hemorrhage, or other types 
of injury. Sometimes it is associated 
with inflammation of the kidneys or 
hardening of the blood vessels. 

Retinoblastoma is a malignant 
tumor of the retina, occurring in in¬ 
fancy or early childhood. In some 
instances tumor of the retina is pres¬ 
ent at birth. This disorder rarely oc¬ 
curs in persons more than ten years 
old. See also eye. 

RHEUMATIC FEVER, a febrile dis¬ 
ease characterized by painful migra¬ 
tory arthritis and a predilection to 
heart damage leading to chronic val¬ 
vular disease. It most frequently at¬ 
tacks young people between the ages 
of six and nineteen and, although no 
longer the leading cause of death in 
tMs age group, is among the fore¬ 
most health problems. In at least 


644 



RHEUMATIC FEVER 


RHEUMATIC FEVER 


oee-fiftli of all cases of rheumatic 
fever the most serious associated con¬ 
dition is the attack on the heart. 
Rheumatic fever usually appears fol¬ 
lowing infections of the nose and 
throat, but it may also be associated 
with ear infection, scarlet fever, SL 
Vitus® dance and other similar ail¬ 
ments related to streptococcal infec¬ 
tion. 

Great progress has been made io 
understandiiig and controlling rheu¬ 
matic fever with the advance in 
control of infection and the near- 
conquest of streptococcal disease. 
However, the exact cause has not 
yet been determ,ined nor the primary 
problem of prevention solved. 

When rheumatic fever involves the 
heart, inflammatory changes occur in 
the muscles which affect the strength 
of the heart and cause it to dilate, 
and thus the heart does not function 
properly. Often rheumatic fever de¬ 
velops insidiously. The so-called 
rheumatic lesions may affect the 
joints, producing symptoms similar 
to '^growing pains,'® and sometimes 
severe pain related to infection of the 
lymph glands is present. MHd fleet¬ 
ing pain may be felt in the tendons 
or muscles and pain in the heels is 
not infrequent. Twitching and men¬ 
tal hallucinations such as accompany 
St. Vitus® dance are sometimes symp¬ 
toms. 

More than half of the patients with 
rheumatic fever have had tonsillitis 
or sore throat from one to four weeks 
before the rheumatic symptoms ap¬ 
pear. These symptoms may appear 
gradually or suddenly, and are usu¬ 
ally associated with overexertion or 


chilling. The temperature rises to 
102® to 104°, the pulse becomes 
rapid, there is profuse sweating, pain 
in the Joiiits, and prostration. Joints 
most subject to stress and strain are 
affected first and pain seldom begins 
in all the joints at once. Sometimes 
the joints swell because of the ac¬ 
cumulation of fluid. 

Pain and the other symptoms can 
usually be controlled by a doctor. 
The detection of the first signs of 
the heart disease associated with 
rheumatic fever is somewhat more 
difficult. When patients come under 
hospital care early, electrocardio¬ 
graph tests will show at once transi¬ 
ent abnormalities in the heart. The 
obvious signs of heart damage, such 
as irregularity, rapidity, pain, 
changes in size, and accumulations 
of fluid in the heart sac, appear later 
and are easily detected by the doctor. 
When the heart enlarges and its ac¬ 
tion is impaired, the sounds of the 
heart change and the pulse generally 
reflects the condition of the heart. 
Also typical of rheumatic condition 
are nodes which appear under the 
skin and an outbreak of rash. 

The valves of the heart may be 
affected. Small nodules form on the 
valves and interfere with normal 
function. The nodules eventualy dis¬ 
appear, leaving scars and causing the 
valve to develop unusually large 
numbers of blood vessels. If attacks 
of rheumatic fever recur, the patient 
may develop hardening of one of 
the valves. The Mood is also affected. 
The white cells increase with the in¬ 
fection and the sedimentation rate 


645 



RHEUMATIC FEVER 


RHEUMATIC FEVER 


of the red blood cells mouiits, re¬ 
ceding as the patient improves. Some¬ 
times infection of the kidneys and 
the intestinal tract or severe pain 
similar to that of an attack of ap¬ 
pendicitis accompany rheumatic fe¬ 
ver. 

At a point in an attack of rheu¬ 
matic fever, the activity lessens and 
the infection becomes relatively in¬ 
active. When the condition becomes 
stabilized, the doctor usually re¬ 
examines the blood and heart and 
retests the white blood cell count 
and the rate of sedimentation of the 
red blood cells. Electrocardiograph 
tests are given and the vital capacity 
of the patient checked to determine 
the condition of his lungs. The doc¬ 
tor decides whether or not the pa¬ 
tient can undertake mild activity. 
If the pulse rate continues high, even 
when the patient is asleep, or if the 
pulse does not return to its normal 
rate promptly following slight ac¬ 
tivity, it is too soon for the patient to 
resume activity. These tests also in¬ 
dicate the likelihood of partial or 
complete recovery. 

The child with rheumatic heart 
disease or with any congenital ail¬ 
ment is especially susceptible to sec¬ 
ondary infection, and continued treat¬ 
ment with antibiotics is essential. At 
present, persons with rheumatic fever 
are treated during the active stage of 
the disease by a variety of proce¬ 
dures. While these procedures are 
palliative, few are absolutely specific 
against rheumatic fever. Sulfa drugs, 
penicillin, ACTH, and hydrocorti¬ 
sone have all been used, hut it has 
not been proved that any of these 


alone or in combination !ia\e con¬ 
quered rheumatic fever. 

Drugs of the salicylate group are 
especially useful in controlling such 
symptoms as fever, pain, and swell¬ 
ing in the joints. However, although 
these drugs do relieve ihe painful 
symptoms, they do not core the dis¬ 
ease itself. ACTH and cortisone have 
been lifesaving in coniroliing inflam¬ 
mation. 

Wflien the heart is especially in¬ 
volved, extra care must be taken to 
avoid every possible strain. Continu¬ 
ous bed rest, for weeks or even 
months, for the duration of the ac¬ 
tive stage is absolutely imperative. It 
is the one treatment of which doc¬ 
tors are certain. 

Gradual resumption of physical 
activity must be carefully controlled. 
For example, the person is allowed 
to sit in a chair half an hour twice a 
day for one week; the next week, 
fifteen minutes more a day, if there 
have been no untoward symptoms; 
and, at the end of two wueks, per¬ 
haps he may be permitted to go to 
the bathroom by himself. Then mod¬ 
erate exercise may be allowed for 
fifteen minutes a day for two or three 
weeks; and perhaps, after five or six 
months, normal activity can be re¬ 
sumed, if the person’s condition per¬ 
mits. 

Unfortunately rheumatic fever has 
a tendency to recur after it has ap¬ 
parently gone. The doctor most deter¬ 
mine, after the active stage has 
passed, whether or not the heart has 
been permanently damaged, and the 
person must continue to be re¬ 
examined at regular intervals to make 


646 



RHEUMATISM 


RHEUMATISM 


certain that new activity has not be¬ 
gun and that he is in good health. 
For example, every sore throat 
should be treated immediately with 
antibiotics and sulfonamides. 

Since complete bed rest, prefera¬ 
bly outdoors in an open pavilion or 
on a protected porch, is so vital, 
children with rheumatic fever are 
best cared for in special sanatoriums 
where they may remain as long as 
necessary under the best possible 
conditions of ventilation, rest, sun¬ 
shine, and nutrition. 

If the person with rheumatic fever 
is anemic, special diets may be given 
which are high in protein, minerals, 
and vitamins. Infected tonsils and 
adenoids should be removed during 
the quiet periods of the rheumatic 
fever. All such operations are imple¬ 
mented with sulfa drugs or penicillin 
or other drugs to prevent secondary 
streptococcus infection. 

The vast majority of children with 
rheumatic heart disease can and 
should attend regular schools and en¬ 
gage in a normally active life. In 
many large cities special schools are 
maintained for children with handi¬ 
caps of the heart. In a recent report 
on the care of rheumatic fever, the 
following recommendations for treat¬ 
ment of children with inactive cases 
of rheumatic fever were made. 

1 . Take measures to improve the 
general health and resistance of the 
child. 

2. Observe the patient regularly 
for signs of recurrence and for al¬ 
terations in cardiac status. 

3. Encourage physical activity to 
the limit of the child's capacity. Only 


a small percentage of children at 
adolescence are found to have suffi¬ 
cient permanent heart disease to pre¬ 
clude normal activity. 

4. Provide vocational guidance 
and occupational training for the 
relatively small group who cannot en¬ 
gage in normal physical activity. 

5. Discourage parents and teachers 
from making a chronic invalid of the 
child. Educational authorities should 
learn that the vast majority who at¬ 
tend regular school when the disease 
is inactive can and should engage in 
normal school life. 

6 . Minimize exposure to upper res¬ 
piratory infections, if possible, by 
improving living conditions—for ex¬ 
ample, by avoiding overcrowding in 
the home, particularly in bedrooms 
—and by controlling the spread of 
infection through school and family 
contacts. 

RHEUMATISMj an overall term 
used to indicate diseases of muscle, 
tendon, joint, bone, or nerve result¬ 
ing in discomfort and disability. 
About 7,500,000 people in the United 
States are affected by it, which makes 
it the most widespread chronic dis¬ 
ease and 10 times more frequent 
than tuberculosis, diabetes, or can¬ 
cer. Of those affected, 400,000 are 
completely helpless; 800,000, despite 
treatment, are partly crippled; and 
the rest have chronic pain and dis¬ 
comfort. Rheumatism has been called 
one of the principal health problems 
in the United States. 

The most common form of rheu¬ 
matism is rheumatoid arthritis. Other 
forms are degenerative joint disease, 


647 



m FACTOR 

spondylitis, bursitis, ibrositis, myosi¬ 
tis, neuritis, lumbago, sciatica, and 
gout. These are all primarily afflic¬ 
tions that affect persons after the age 
of forty; Rheumatic fever, which oi- 
ten involves the heart, is essentially 
a disease of cMidhood, attacking 
children between the ages of five and 
fifteen. See aka names of specific dis¬ 
eases mentioned above, 

MH FACTOR* See blood types. 

KHINITISj any inflammation of the 
nasal mucous membrane. One of the 
chief forms is the common cold. 
Rhinitis is largely the result of infec¬ 
tion, but may be due to sensitivity to 
various substances. See also common 
cold; hay fever; ozena. 

MHMOPHYMAj a form of acne, in¬ 
volving the blood vessels and seba¬ 
ceous glands in the nose, which re¬ 
sults in swelling and formation of 
great nodules. Rhinophyma is a dis¬ 
figuring condition, sometimes called 
'Toper’s nose” or "whiskey nose.” 
Little can be done to alleviate it, ex¬ 
cept by plastic surgery. 

RHINOPLASTY^ a plastic operation 
on the nose. 

RHUBARB, an herb which contains 
certain substances which act as a 
purgative. It was once widely used 
medically as a laxative in certain 
forms of constipation involving the 
intestines. As a purgative it is still 
popular because of its action of first 
cleansing the bowels and then check¬ 
ing any tendency to diarrhea. The 
mixture of rhubarb and soda is a 
rather widely known home remedy. 


RIBS 

RIBOFLAVIN, the scientific ferrn 
for the vitamin commooly called vita¬ 
min Ba. A deficiency of riboflavin 
may produce general body weakness 
and various skin disorders. The tip 
and margin of the tongue become 
sore and inflamed, painful cracks 
and fissures occur at the comers of 
the lips, and the face becomes greasy 
and scaly. The eyes are pailicularly 
sensitive to riboflavin deficiency and 
the cornea becomes cloudy and ul¬ 
cerated, the mucous membranes in¬ 
flamed, and the vision may be perma¬ 
nently impaired. 

Management of riboflavin defi¬ 
ciency demands that the patient be 
given preparations containing large 
amounts of all major vitamins since 
a diet deficient in riboflavin is almost 
always deficient in all vitamins. The 
diet should then be permanently 
modified to contain adequate amounts 
of high riboflavin foods, such as 
liver, yeast, milk, eggs, whole-grain 
cereals, and greens. See also nutri¬ 
tion; VITAMINS. 

RIBSs the curved, elongated bones 
which extend from the backbone 
around to the front of the chest. 
There are twenty-four ribs, twelve 
on each side of the rib case. The 
upper seven are directly attached to 
the breastbone and arc known as the 
true ribs. Of the remaining five, or 
false ribs, each of the upper three is 
attached to the rib above. The last 
two, called floating ribs, are not at¬ 
tached to other ribs. 

The ribs act as a protective case for 
the organs in the chest. They may be 
injured by direct violence, such as 


648 



RICKETS 


RICKETTSIAL DISEASES 


blows, but are often fractured by the 
chest, under compression, as when 
a vehicle runs over the body. Fre¬ 
quently a fractured rib heals, simply 
by being properly strapped in place. 
An x-ray should be taken in every 
case where there is even a suspicion 
of a broken rib. Acute pain, in¬ 
creased by breathing, is usually a 
sign of a broken rib. 

In some cases an extra rib, found 
high up on the chest, may cause pain 
because of pressure on the tissues. 
This is known as a cervical rib. 

RICKETS, a deficiency disease that 
affects infants and children and is 
characterized by a failure of calcium 
salts to be deposited in sufiBcient 
quantity in growing cartilage and 
newly formed bone in the body. De¬ 
formities and other symptoms result 
from the failure of the bones to de¬ 
velop properly; they include growth 
of nodules on the ribs, development 
of potbelly, and bending bones. The 
child with rickets often sits with his 
thighs slightly spread apart, with one 
leg crossed over the other. The hands 
are placed on the floor or on the 
thighs, to assist the backbone in hold¬ 
ing the body erect. The pull on the 
tissues by the muscles and the liga¬ 
ments plus the softness of the bones 
cause bending, so that bowlegs and 
knock-knees are characteristic. Rick¬ 
ets also leads to delayed eruption of 
temporary teeth, and to deformities 
of the unerupted permanent teeth. 

Since rickets is caused by insuffi¬ 
cient amounts of vitamin D, calcium, 
and phosphorus during the age when 
growth is rapid, and since the failure 


to receive sufficient amounts of one 
vitamin is likely to be associated with 
the failure to receive sufficient 
amounts of other vitamins and min¬ 
erals, treatment involves a proper 
diet which includes them. 

Parents should make certain that 
children, even in the nursing period, 
receive sufficient amounts of vita¬ 
mins A, C, and D. They should also 
receive adequate amounts of calcium 
in the diet, best taken as milk, to in¬ 
sure proper and healthy growth. Cod 
liver oil, cod liver oil substitutes, 
vitamin D milk, and other dietary 
supplements are successful methods 
of preventing development of rickets 
in children and infants. 

In severe cases of active rickets, 
large doses of vitamin D are admin¬ 
istered, and in cases that do not yield 
rapidly massive doses are given. The 
extent of rickets can be diagnosed, 
and the progress of treatment 
checked by x-ray. The diet must also 
contain sufficient amounts of calcium 
and phosphorus, which are necessary 
for the body to properly use vitamin 
D. See also nutrition; vitamins. 

RICKETTSIAL DISEASES, ill¬ 
nesses caused by one of the Rickett¬ 
sial organisms. Rickettsiae are a 
family of microorganisms which have 
characteristics in common with both 
the filterable viruses and true bacteria. 
Under the microscope they have 
many shapes, but most of them re¬ 
semble tiny rods. They were named 
after Dr. H. T. Ricketts of Chicago, 
who first isolated such an organism 
while he was studying Rocky Moim- 
tain spotted fever and epidemic ty- 


649 



RICKETTSIALPOX 


RINGWORM 


phus fever. In the course of these ex¬ 
periments Dr. Ricketts contracted 
typhus and died. 

The rickettsiae are transmitted 
from man to man by an intermediate 
host, usually blood-sucking ticks, 
lice, or fleas. They generally pass 
into the blood stream of man through 
the bite of the insect, but infection 
may also be caused by excrement of 
the insect deposited on the skin. 

The organism is responsible for at 
least four groups of diseases in hu¬ 
man beings: typhus fever, the Rocky 
Mountain spotted fever group, scrub 
typhus, and Q fever. A person who 
has had a disease in a particular rick¬ 
ettsial disease group will have com¬ 
plete immunity to other diseases of 
the same group but will not be im¬ 
mune to those of the other groups. 

Treatment, prevention, and con¬ 
trol of the rickettsial diseases have 
made great strides with the recent 
development of large-scale anti- 
rickettsial vaccines, improved meth¬ 
ods for mass delousing with DDT 
and other new insecticides, and with 
some of the newer antibiotics. See 
also names of specific diseases. 

RICKETTSIALPOX, a disease 
caused by Rickettsia acari, a mild 
infection first identified in New York 
City in 1946. Since that time, 140 to 
180 cases have been reported there 
each year. No cases have been re¬ 
ported anywhere else. 

The infection is transmitted by a 
small colorless mite which infests 
house mice and small rodents. About 
a week or two after the bite of an 
infected mite, a firm reddish blister 


appears at the site of the bite. It 
dries, forms a small black ulcer, and 
in two or three weeks the scab drops 
off, leaving a small scar. It is not 
painful. Rickettsialpox is character¬ 
ized by fever, chills, sweats, head¬ 
ache, muscle pains, and loss of appe¬ 
tite, which last about a week. The 
eyes are sensitive and light hurts 
them. A rash appears on the body, 
sometimes involving the mucosa of 
the mouth, which also disappears in 
about a week. 

Rickettsialpox is sometimes con¬ 
fused with chicken pox. However, it is 
not a childhood disease, and may 
occur in all age groups. Eradication 
of house mice and consequently the 
carrier mites helps to control the 
disease. See also rickettsial dis¬ 
eases. 

RINGWORM, a ring-shaped infec¬ 
tion, the most common of the super¬ 
ficial fungus diseases, once believed 
to have been caused by a worm, and 
hence formerly called tinea, the Latin 
word for worm. The infection is 
also found in dogs, cats, and other 
domestic animals, and is spread by 
contact with infected sources. 

Normally the skin carries several 
species of fungi which remain inac¬ 
tive xmtU they are aroused by condi¬ 
tions favorable for their growth, such 
as lowered resistance, excessive per¬ 
spiration, heat, moisture, or friction. 
The fungi then attack the hair fol¬ 
licles of the scalp or beard, the nails, 
and certain nonhairy skin surfaces. 
The infection results in unsightly 
troublesome sores which stubbornly 
resist treatment. 


650 



RINGWORM 


RINGWORM 


Ringworm usually starts with 
small, red, slightly raised, round or 
oval sores which gradually enlarge 
and become redder. Blisters often 
follow, with some itching and burn¬ 
ing. They generally start healing in 
the center, while the infection spreads 
outward in circular fashion. 

Many ringworm infections, espe¬ 
cially those found in children, are 
highly contagious. Public schools and 
children’s hospitals take the utmost 
precautions to prevent the spread of 
the infection when a case is re¬ 
ported. 

Ringworm of the scalp, or tinea 
capitis, is a common highly conta¬ 
gious infection, found most fre¬ 
quently in children. The hair loses 
its luster, becomes brittle and breaks 
off easily. The scalp becomes covered 
with grayish scaly patches and short 
stumps of diseased hair. The more 
severe forms consist of boggy in¬ 
flamed sores which contain pus. 
Temporary baldness in stubborn 
cases may become permanent. 

Treatment is directed primarily to¬ 
ward preventing the spread of the 
infection. The involved areas must be 
kept clean and dry and protected 
from any friction. The scalp should 
be shampooed daily with tincture of 
green soap and a good fungicide. The 
hair should be clipped short and the 
cuttings burned. In resistant cases the 
hair and its roots are removed by a 
physician. Combs, brushes and caps 
used during this period should be 
sterilized or destroyed and the fingers 
and nails of infected persons kept 
clean to avoid a secondary infection 


and to prevent spreading the ring¬ 
worm by scratching. 

The sooner a ringworm infection 
is recognized and proper treatment 
begun, the more rapidly will the 
spread of the infection be halted and 
the disease eradicated. 

Ringworm of the groin, or tinea 
cruris, an eruption which generally 
affects the skin of the inner thighs or 
under the arms, may be found in 
both sexes, though more commonly 
in males. The eruption varies from 
light brown scales in mild cases to 
bright red patches in the active 
stages, with well-defined raised bor¬ 
ders. There is intense itching, which 
is worse at night, and the condition 
is aggravated by obesity, excessive 
sweating, and lack of cleanliness. 

Ringworm of the groin is one of 
the most common fungus diseases in 
the tropics where it is known as 
dhobie itch. During World War II 
it was prevalent, particularly in 
Egypt and East Africa. The disease is 
sometimes contracted around swim¬ 
ming pools and bath houses from in¬ 
fected clothing and towels. The erup¬ 
tion often subsides during cold 
weather, the infected skin becoming 
dry, flaky, and stained. Usually, how¬ 
ever, it recurs with warm weather. 

As in all cases of ringworm, the ut¬ 
most precaution should be taken to 
prevent the spread of the infection. 
Frequent bathing, following by lib¬ 
eral use of dusting powder, and daily 
change of underclotiiing are essential. 
The infected person should sleep 
alone, and bed linens and personal 
laundry should be sterilized. 


651 



iINGWOiM 


RiNGWOlM 


TreatmeEt depends on the acnte- 
ness of the condition. For chronic 
cases the specialist often prescribes 
ointments containing bismuth or 
salicylic acid. The infected area must 
be kept clean and dry at all times, 
and reinfection by scratching or wear¬ 
ing contaminated clothing most be 
avoided. 

Ringworm of the body, or tinea 
circinata, is another form of the in¬ 
fection, found in the nonhairy skin. 
This eruption begins as a small red 
sore and enlarges outward. The dry 
type tends to become scaly and the 
moist type forms little blisters or 
pus sacs. It usually begins on the ex¬ 
posed parts of the face and neck 
and later spreads to the trunk, fore¬ 
arms and legs. It is generally ac¬ 
quired from household pets. 

This type of ringworm yields 
readily to treatment. The infected 
area is scrubbed with tincture of 
green soap to remove the crusted 
debris, and mild ointments of sali¬ 
cylic acid and sulphur are sufficient to 
control the condition. 

Favus (tinea favosa). Although 
favus, another type of ringworm gen¬ 
erally attacks the scalp, and is often 
limited to that region, it is caused by 
a different fungus than the one re¬ 
sponsible for tinea capitis. Favus is 
caused by a vegetable parasite known 
as Trichophyton schoenleini, named 
for the German physician who first 
discovered it, Johann Lukas Schon- 
lein. Climatic and social conditions 
may be factors in the transmission of 
this disease. It is relatively rare in the 
United States, but occurs commonly 
in China, Central Asia, the Balkans, 


and Germany, Children are much 
more susceplible to the Inicction than 

adults. 

Favus begins as a small, scaly, 
inflamed sore wliich is soon covered 
with a sulphur-yeliow, cup-shaped 
adherent crust, or scutulum, through 
which sparse short hairs project. The 
hairs are brittle, dull, aotl liisterless, 
and break off easily. A “mousy” odor 
is usually present. 

If the condition is treated early, 
little permanent baldness or scarring 
results. Cases of long duration may 
occasionally show large patches of 
slightly reddened and scaly areas of 
baldness. 

Treatment is similar to that for 
tinea captis. The hair is closely 
clipped, the crusts removed, and the 
scalp thoroughly shampooed. Anti- 
parasitic ointments and lotions are 
applied, and the infected hairs are 
pulled out. The hair should be kept 
short and local treatments continued 
for at least a month after the scalp 
seems to be cured. 

Ringworm of the nails, tinea 
unguim, or onychomycosis, may be 
associated with infection of the hair, 
as in favus, or it may appear inde¬ 
pendently. It is not uncommon among 
nurses, who acquire the infection by 
contact. The condition begins on the 
undersurface of the nail, which be¬ 
comes dull and ridged, and is raised 
off its bed by a cloudy grayish patch 
extending toward the nail root. 

Treatment consists of removing the 
infected nail and applying antipara- 
sitic medication during the entire 
period of growth of the new nail. 
Recurrences are common, especially 


652 



iOCKY MOUNTAIN SPOTTED FEVER 


among those whose work necessitates 
wetting the hands ofteiis for example^ 
washers^ soda dispensers^ fur skin- 
nerSj canners^ and housewives* 

For ringworm of the beard see 
barber's itch* 

See also athlete's foot. 

ROCKY MOUNTAIN SPOTTED 
FEVER? an infectious condition 
caused by a rickettsial organism simi¬ 
lar to the one that causes typhus, and 
transmitted to man by the bite of the 
wood tick or the dog tick. Spotted 
fever was known to the Indians of 
Montana and Idaho long before white 
settlers came. It has appeared, in 
recent years in most parts of the 
country. Similar tick-borne diseases 
are the boutonneuse fever of the 
Mediterranean, South African tick- 
bite fever, and other varieties found 
in Brazil, Colombia, Mexico, and 
Canada. 

Three species of man-biting tick 
carry spotted fever in this country: 



Rocfcy IVlo8iiif0ln Spoftecl Fever — The 
wood tick may carry a variety of virus dis¬ 
eases# including Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever. 


the common wood tick of the north¬ 
western states, the dog tick in the 
East, and the Lone Star tick of Texas. 
The ticks, which attach themselves to 
animals in wooded areas, pick up the 
rickettsiae and remain infected for 
life. The eggs and newly hatched ticks 
also cany the parasite and pass it on 
from generation to generation. Hu¬ 
man beings are infected by the tick 
bite or from a skin wound contami¬ 
nated by crushed ticks or tick feces. 
People have been known to be in¬ 
fected by crashing ticks with their 
fingers wMle removing them from 
dogs. In the West, where the wood 
tick is the carrier, more men have 
contracted the fever than women. 
In the East, where the infection is 
transmitted by the dog tick, women 
and children are more often affected. 

About two days to two weeks 
after a person has been infected, the 
symptoms appear. A few days of 
malaise, chilly sensations, and loss of 
appetite are followed by headache, 
chills, severe pains in the back and 
muscles and the large joints. The 
face is flushed, the eyes are sensitive 
to light, a dry cough often develops, 
and the temperature may rise to lOS"" 
and in severe cases even higher. On 
the third day a rash develops. Oc¬ 
casionally it is preceded by a mottled 
appearance of the face, neck, and 
upper chest, almost like that in 
measles. The rash spreads to the 
wrists, ankles, and back; then to the 
forehead, arms, and legs; and finally 
to the chest and abdomen. The rash 
begins to fade as the fever drops. 
Restlessness and insomnia often de- 


653 



iOCKY MOyNTAIN SPOTTED FEVER 



at ^ \ Engo)()ed, mjicted 

s to/ \ tick kii/s L(/gs 

cts/ \ on (/found 


Adult 
attaches 
and infectsj 

SAtfuH* \. 


tick 




Infected 

eggs 

Etjqs d( i (iop 
info nt/niphs 



Infected 

6-legged 

nynipli 


Infected Held rat 


Infected 
8-legged nymph 


Infected field mouse 


Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever—This disease is transmitted through the wood tick. The 
female tick transfers the organisms to the offspring through her eggs. The nymph feeds on 
the blood of rodents, and the adult tick infects dogs and mon. Care shoold be token to 
protect pets from ticks. 


velop. The disease tends to be milder 
in children than in adults. One attack 
of spotted fever generally gives im¬ 
munity for a long period. Second 
attacls may occasionally occur after 
a lapse of eight years or longer. 

Early diagnosis and treatment with 


antibiotics can reduce the fever in a 
few days and prevent or minunize the 
more severe disturbances which fol¬ 
low the fever. 

The most effective protection for 
persons exposed to spotted fever is 
vaccination, preferably in the spring, 


654 



iOUNOWORM 


lypiURE 


before the ticks become numerous. A 
series of three injections establishes 
immuiiity for about a year, but must 
be repeated annually. People in tick- 
infested areas should wear one-piece 
outer clothing and high boots. The 
entire body should be inspected daily 
for ticks, especially about the hair¬ 
line of the neck and the pubic hairs. 
The tick is slow to attach itself, and 
starts feeding only some time after it 
has become attached. Children should 
be examined twice daUy, since in their 
play they may become especially 
exposed. Ticks should be removed 
with great care, to avoid crushing 
them and thus contaminating the spot 
to which they have become attached. 
The site of attachment should be 
disinfected with soap and water, and 
the wound swabbed with a tooth¬ 
pick dipped in crude phenol or the 
most potent household antiseptic 


available. A dab of ether, cMoroform, 
or acetone will usualy cause the 
tick to drop off. If not, forceps or 
tweezers should be used gently, with 
care taken not to leave the mouth of 
the tick embedded in the skin. Ticks 
should never be removed with the 
bare fingers. Dust sprays containing 
an insecticide may be used to re¬ 
move ticks from livestock and dogs, 
but should not be applied to cats, 
which lick their fur and may be 
poisoned. DDT and cMordane, ap¬ 
plied directly to the ground and to 
low vegetation, are both effective in 
controlling wooded areas infested by 
ticks. 

ROUNDWORM. See worms. 

RUBELLA^ another name for Ger¬ 
man measles. See german measles. 

RUPTURE. See hernia. 


655 




SACROILIAC, the joint at the base 
of the spine, between the sacrum and 
the ilium. 

SACRUM, a triangular-shaped bone 
formed by the five sacral vertebrae 
fused together at the lower end of 
the spine. Inflammation of the joint 
between the sacrum at the back and 
the pelvis at the front produces pain 
which is sometimes mistaken for 
sciatica. 

SADISM, a sexual perversion in 
which a person derives pleasure from 
inflicting cruelty or pain on others. 
The word sadism is derived from the 
Marquis de Sade, a Frenchman who 
lived about 1800 and wrote several 
books about sexual cruelty. 

ST. VITUS’ DANCE. See chorea. 

SALIVA, the opalescent, tasteless, 
weak alkaline fluid secreted chiefly by 
the salivary gjands which open in 
the mouth under the jaw in front 
of the ear and under the tongue. The 


linin g of the mouth also secretes 
saliva. 

Saliva contains an enzyme which 
acts in the digestion of starch to 
change it into sugar. It serves also to 
moisten and soften food in the chew¬ 
ing process, and to keep the lining of 
the mouth moist. 

SALK VACCINE. See poliomye¬ 
litis. 

SALPINGITIS, inflammation of the 
uterine or Fallopian tubes, due to in¬ 
fection. See also fallopian tubes. 

SALT, chemically a substance result¬ 
ing from the combination of an acid 
and a base. In nontechnical usage, 
however, it usually refers to the white 
powdery condiment, sodium chloride, 
commonly used to season foods. 

The average person consumes 
about half an ounce of salt daily. This 
is usually adequate; but in extreme 
heat, when perspiration is heavy, 
more than the usual amount of salt 


656 



SANDFLY FEVER 


SCABIES 


is lost by the body and a deficiency 
can result, characterized by weakness, 
cramplike pains, and nausea. The in¬ 
crease in salt consumption necessary 
to relieve the deficiency is small— 
one extra pinch of salt is usually 
enough. 

About three ounces of salt are 
present in the body of an adult per¬ 
son at any one time. The body’s use 
of salt and its elimination are believed 
to be regulated by the cortex, or 
outer layer of adrenal glands, the 
small bodies which secrete cortisone. 

The human body uses salt to supply 
the chlorine required to synthesize 
hydrochloric acid, a significant di¬ 
gestive substance secreted by the 
stomach. Pepsin performs its digestive 
function only in the presence of 
hydrochloric acid. 

The amount of salt in the diet 
may be related to various conditions 
which affect the kidneys and blood 
pressure, and low-salt and salt-free 
diets are prescribed in such cases. A 
reduction in salt, perhaps the usual 
half oimce decreased to a tenth of an 
ounce, may be desirable in dropsy 
or edema, in which fluid accumulates 
in the tissue. 

Sodium chloride has various medi¬ 
cal functions. Salt is injected when 
fluid which has been lost from the 
body by bleeding must be replaced. 
A strong salt solution is a good 
emetic and a weak solution is a 
mild gargle. 

SANDFLY FEVER, an infectious 
viral disease, resembling dengue fever 
in many of its symptoms. It is of 
short duration and occurs most fre¬ 
quently in the Mediterranean area. It 


is caused by the bite of the sandfly, 
Phlebotomus paptasii. The condition 
is also known as pappataci fever, 
three-day fever, and phlebotomus 
fever. See also dengue. 

SARCOMA, malignant tumor, most 
frequently involving nonepitheliai 
tissue, which includes fibrous and 
connective tissue, cartilage and bone. 
Cancer in the skin, arising from the 
layers below the epidermis, occurs 
only in children. Sarcoma of the 
nerve cells is known as fibroneuro- 
sarcoma. It is also found in lymphoid 
and fatty tissue. Sarcoma may be 
detected and diagnosed by micro¬ 
scopic examination of a piece of the 
tumor, a procedure called a biopsy. 
See also cancer. 

SCABIES, popularly known as “the 
itch,” or “seven-year itch,” follows 
invasion of the skin by the micro¬ 
scopic itch mite, which is no more 
than a fiftieth of an inch long, and 
whose scientific name is Acarus 
scabiei. 

The mites live on the surface, but 
the eggs of the female are laid under 
the skin. The female mito burrow 
under the skin and may remain for 
a long time, traveling along a tunnel 
of some length and laying eggs in 
the burrow. The yoimg develop 
within a few days, then come to the 
surface where they repeat the cycle. 

Several areas of the body seem to 
be favored by the mites. Most often 
they burrow on the inside of the 
fingers, near the webs. Other loca¬ 
tions are the insides of the toes, the 
ankles and knee joints, the front of 
the armpit, the breasts of girls and 


657 



SCARLET FEVER 


SCARLET FEVER 


women, and the outer sex organs of 
boys and meii« Tlie face never seems 
to be attacked. 

The body becomes sensitized, to the 
insects and intense itching results. 
Numerous blisters may form, and 
scratching may result in infection. 

To rid the body of the itch mites, 
the most effective treatment includes 
bathing in hot water every day, 
followed by the use of sulphur oint¬ 
ment. For patients sensitive to sul¬ 
phur, ointments containing other 
drags, including benzene hexachlo- 
ride which is less irritating than 
sulphur, may be prescribed. 

Underclothing and bedding must 
be changed daily until all danger of 
further hatching of the eggs is re¬ 
moved. Extreme care must be taken 
that the infested person not infect 
other persons with whom he comes in 
contact. 

SCAMLET FEVEEj an acute infec¬ 
tious disease characterized by a scar¬ 
let skin eruption. It occurs most 
frequently in fall or winter, and in 
children between the ages of five and 
twelve. Children less than one year 
old seldom contract it, probably be¬ 
cause they have received antisub- 
stances in their blood from the 
mother which afford protection. 

The period of incubation is ap¬ 
proximately three days following con¬ 
tact with an infected person. The 
symptoms are a painful sore throat, 
chill, nausea, and vomiting. The 
pulse rate increases, the temperature 
may rise as high as 104®, and the 
child may suffer a severe headache. 

The rash first appears in pinpoint 


spots of bright red, usually on the 
chest and neck, and then gradually 
over the rest of the body. Although 
this rash attacks the body more often 
than the face, the face often shows 
red spots, if only because o£ the high 
fever. Although the rash may con¬ 
tinue only two or three days, it wili 
take a week or more before the skin 
regains its normal color. Ten days 
to two weeks after the onset of 
scarlet fever, peeling of the skin be¬ 
gins. Large pieces of skin may come 
away from the feet and hands or 
drop off in scales, and other parts 
of the body can be affected, such as 
the teeth, fingernails, and sometimes 
the hair. The tongue develops a 
pitted scarlet appearance which gives 
it the name strawberry tongue. 

Although scarlet fever often proves 
to be a relatively mild infection, it 
may have serious complications. The 
kidneys are frequently involved, or 
the ears, glands, and Joints, so that 
this disease can do serious damage. 

Scarlet fever is occasionally con¬ 
tracted by drinking mEk or by contact 
with wastage thrown off from an in¬ 
fected person. The peeled skin is 
harmless, unless it happens to carry 
secretions from the nose or throat 
of the patient. 

Many persons may have had the 
disease in a mild form at an earlier 
time, when it was erroneously diag¬ 
nosed or ignored, and thereby gained 
immunity. This may help to explain 
why scarlet fever appears to be only 
mEdly contagious. One attack of the 
illness seems to assure almost certain 
immunity. 

Scientific understanding of scarlet 


658 



SCHIZOPHiEMIA 


SCHIZOPHRENIA 


fever has advanced greatly in recent 
years, and both diagnosis and treat¬ 
ment have improved» The strepto¬ 
coccus is the cause of the disease, 
and wherever the germ grows, poison 
or toxin is produced. If this poison 
is injected into the skin of someone 
who has never had scarlet fever, a 
severe reaction will be noted. In those 
persons who have had the disease and 
are immune, there will be no reaction. 

When a small amount of this poi¬ 
son is rendered harmless and is in¬ 
jected into a person who has never 
been infected, he will then be able 
to resist the disease. However, this 
preventive toxoid is administered only 
to a person who has been exposed, 
or who works in the vicinity of people 
with scarlet fever, or during epi¬ 
demics. The most ejffective technique 
to prevent spread of scarlet fever is 
to avoid contact with infected per¬ 
sons, particularly when discharge 
from the nose, throat, or ears is 
active. 

As long as the fever persists, a 
mild diet is recommended. Once the 
fever has subsided, however, soft 
foods are usually given until the peel¬ 
ing period begins, when milk and 
fresh vegetables are added as well as 
food rich in vitamins, minerals, and 
protein. 

Treatment demands that particular 
attention be given that as little effort 
as possible be placed on the kidneys 
and heart, since they are already re¬ 
ceiving from the toxin itself an 
attack almost greater than they can 
endure. OrdinarEy the patient is re¬ 
quired to remain in bed at least three 
weeks and must be protected from 


chili and cold. Sponge baths of tepid 
water may be given. A mild gargle 
may relieve sore throat, and one of 
the newer antibiotics wEl be even 
more effective. The person who cares 
for the patient should preferably be 
someone who has already had the 
disease, since he is directly exposed 
to germs. Reactions of the heart and 
kidneys and ears must be carefully 
watched. Occasionally when the ear is 
infected the ear drum is punctured 
so that the pus can be drained before 
the interna! ear is involved. 

Since the advent of sulfa drugs 
and penicUlin, serious complications 
from scarlet fever have become rare. 
The drugs are also highly effective 
against the germ itself sq that scarlet 
fever is no longer a serious threat. 

SCHIZOFIMENIA, a severe mental 
disorder, a major psychosis, which 
involves a loss of contact with reality 
and a temporary or permanent dis¬ 
organization or disintegration of per¬ 
sonality. “Schizo” means splitting, 
“phxenia” means mind, and the term 
refers to a splitting away of the mind 
from reality. Schizophrenia is the 
most common form of mental illness 
and one-fourth of aU hospitalized 
mental patients fall into this category. 

The schizophrenic person rejects 
the outside world and turns to his 
own self-created world. His actions 
are made in accordance with this 
imagined world and so are difficult to 
interpret. His speech may be garbled 
and unintelligible and his actions 
completely inappropriate to Ms ex¬ 
ternal situation, since they are moti¬ 
vated by his fantasy world and his 


659 



SCIATICA 


SCIATIC NEUiiTiS 


inabEity to perceive reality in the 
normal way. 

Schizophrenia is not one disease 
but rather a set of complex symptoms 
which encompass many forms of 
mental disorder. The causes are ex¬ 
tremely difficult to treat. Factors 
which would appear pertinent in some 
cases do not apply to others. The 
schizophrenic is a person who has 
apparently been unable to find a way 
of adjusting to some painful situation 
and so has rejected the outside world 
in favor of Ms own inner version. 
Organic factors are also believed to 
be related to schizophrenia. 

In the past few decades, under¬ 
standing and treatment of schizo¬ 
phrenia has greatly improved and 
the rate of partial or complete re¬ 
covery is Mgher. Expert psychiatric 
care is essential, preferably as soon 
as possible. 

SCIATICA® See sciatic nerve; 

SCIATIC NEURITIS. 

SCIATIC NERVEg the large long 
nerve which supplies the muscles of 
the thigh, leg, and foot and the skin 
of the leg. It runs the entire length 
of the leg with many branches and 
subdivisions. The nerve can be 
irritated or compressed at any point. 
See also sciatic neuritis. 

SCIATIC NEUMITISj also fre¬ 
quently called sciatica, inflammation 
of the sciatic nerve, the longest nerve 
in the body, which passes from the 
lower part of the spinal column 
downward to the leg along the rear 
of the thigh. The word sciatica is 
often applied to cover a variety of 



660 



SCLEiODEtMA 


SCLEiODEiMA 


ailments lia¥iiig no involvement 
with, the sciatic nerve. True sciatica is 
sciatic neuritis^ and pain is felt in 
the thigh and other areas associated 
with the sciatic nerve. Sciatic pain 
accompanies numerous conditionSj 
and may be due to a number of 
factors which adversely affect the 
sciatic nerve. 

The part of the spinal cord where 
the nerve originates may be disturbed, 
for example, by a slipped or ruptured 
disc, or by an inflamination in the 
vertebral bones. An abnormal con¬ 
dition in a nearby blood vessel may 
cause it to press on the nerve. Acute 
and prolonged constipation is some¬ 
times responsible because the ac¬ 
cumulation in the bowel exerts 
pressure on the nerve or because the 
body absorbs unexcreted toxic sub¬ 
stances to which the nerve reacts. 
External conditions or occurrences 
may precipitate a sciatic disturbance, 
such as a bad fall or severe contortion 
of the body, or prolonged exposure 
to cold and dampness. 

Because of the number of possible 
causes and the numerous possible 
ramifications which sciatic neuritis 
may have, it is, like headache and 
backache, an apparently simple dis¬ 
comfort which masks a potentially 
complicated situation. Diagnosis of 
the specific cause of a particular case 
of sciatic neuritis demands the atten¬ 
tion of a skilled physician. The pain 
is only a symptom and the source of 
it must be determined before proper 
treatment can begin. The physician 
will first ascertain whether the pain 
involved is due to a sciatic condition 
or some other cause. He will check 


the sacroiliac joint, the spine for 
curvature, the back for bones out of 
position, the legs for muscle spasms 
or disordered muscles and tissue. 

Treatment may begin with simple 
measures to relieve the immediate dis¬ 
comfort: bed rest, placing the body 
in the position with the least possible 
strain on affected parts, or use of heat 
to reduce pain. The doctor will 
examine the patient’s diet and his 
daily activities, making sure that the 
diet is nutritionally adequate and 
that the patient’s job, exercise, and 
general environment do not aggravate 
his condition. He may, for example, 
recommend that a patient who works 
in a cold damp place change his job. 
Injection of one of a variety of medic¬ 
inal substances into the sciatic nerve 
or the surrounding areas is some¬ 
times advisable and may bring good 
but not permanent results. Other 
measures are available for specialized 
treatment. See also slipped disc, 

SCLERODEMMA, a disease in which 
all the layers of the skin become hard 
and rigid. A serious affliction, sclero¬ 
derma attacks women more often 
than men, usually between the ages 
of twenty and forty. Localized sclero¬ 
derma often appears and disappears 
spontaneously in children. 

Before the disease becomes ap¬ 
parent, the victim may for some 
time have complained about altera¬ 
tions in the circulation of Ms blood. 
Soon the hands and feet take on a 
bluish tinge, wMch changes later to 
wMte or yellow. At the same time 
the tissue itself becomes increasingly 
hard and rigid. Eventually both arms 


661 



SCLEROSIS 


SEASiCiCr^ESS 


and legs—and even the entire body 
—may become hard as stone. 

Almost nothing is known about 
the cause of scleroderma. Obviously 
serious damage is done to the tissues, 
as well as to the superficial blood 
vessels, but the nature of the toxin is 
unknown. Some authorities have sug¬ 
gested that the cause may be traced to 
glandular changes and others believe 
that the nervous system causes the 
condition. 

Treatment has included use of the 
electric needle, use of ointments and 
massage, and a change of climate. 
Modem drugs have been tried, such 
as sodium paba, cortisone, and 
ACTH. Little success has been re¬ 
corded, however, either in the con¬ 
trol or the cure of this serious and 
strange disease. 

SCLEROSIS;, a hardening of part of 
the body due to overgrowth of 
fibrous tissue. The term is applied 
particularly to hardening of the 
nervous tissue from atrophy or de¬ 
generation of the nerve elements, 
and to thickening of the arteries 
caused by growth of fibrous tissue 
and deposits of fatty substances and 
calcium salts. See also arterioscle¬ 
rosis. 

SCOLIOSIS. See spinal curvature. 

SCRUB TYPHUS, the common 
name in this country for a rickettsial 
infection known also as tsutsuga- 
mushi, Japanese river fever, and mite 
typhus. It is widespread in Asia and 
southwestern Pacific areas, and is 
carried to man by field mice infected 
by mites or chiggers. 

662 


Scrub typhus was a serious prob¬ 
lem for military medicine during 
World War II, when thousands oi 
cases broke out among troops sta¬ 
tioned in the Pacific region. 

The illness follows the course of 
the rickettsial infections, with head¬ 
ache, fever, chill, and msomnia. A 
characteristic symptom is the small 
ulcer, or eschar, which develops 
where the mite is attached to the 
skin. About the fifth day a red rash 
appears on the trunk. The ulcer and 
rash are generally absent in Asiatic 
peoples. Temperature drops by the 
end of the second week, and is 
followed by slow convalescence. One 
attack will give immunity for many 
years. 

Appropriate antibiotics produce an 
immediate drop in temperature, and 
general improvement ordinarEy oc¬ 
curs in twelve hours. Vaccines have 
not yet been developed to prevent 
the disease. Mite repellents such as 
phthalates, or benzyl benzoate, 
smeared by hand on clothes and ex¬ 
posed skin surfaces, are effective. 
These drugs should not be used on 
or around sensitive skin areas such 
as the eyes or the crotch. See also 
rickettsial diseases. 

SCURVY, a nutritional disorder 
caused by a lack of vitamin C. It is 
characterized by extreme weakness, 
spongy gums, and a tendency to de¬ 
velop bleeding under the skin and 
from the mucous membranes and 
bone coverings. See also nutrition; 

VITAMINS. 

SEASICKNESS* motion sick¬ 
ness. 



SEBACEOUS CYST 


SEBORRHEA 


SEBACEOUS CYST. See wen. 

SEBOKRHEA^ a functional disease 
caused by excessiYe secretion of the 
sebaceous or oil-producing glands in 
the skin. The condition may vary 
widely, from nothing more than 
dandruff, the commonest form, to 
seborrheic dermatitis, in which the 
whole scalp and sometimes the face 
and other parts of the body develop 
a greasy kind of crusting and scaling, 
accompanied by red irritated areas. 

In some cases, dandruff begins in 
childhood as a simple scaling of small 
white bits of skin from the scalp and 
then continues as a mild annoyance 
for many years. Often, however, the 
process gradually becomes more and 
more involved with greasy discharges 
from the scalp and skin of the face, 
and '*oily’’ seborrhea may develop, 
sometimes with so much discharge 
that drops of oil actually collect on 
the skin. 

Physicians attribute these symp¬ 
toms to a variety of causes. Some feel 
that these phenomena are the result 
of a constitutional predisposition to a 
kind of skin which is subject to 
excessive growth of oil-producing 
glands and enlargement of pores. 
Others believe that actual infection 
by some microorganism is involved. 
Changes in behavior of various 
internal glands of the body and such 
factors as faulty diet and chronic 
intestinal disorder are also blamed. 
Many feel that in all likelihood more 
than one of these factors, and pos¬ 
sibly all of them, may be involved. 

Treatment of troublesome dandruff 
should be under a doctor^s direction, 


but the person who has seborrhea 
will find that more than the usual 
participation by the patient is re¬ 
quired. Success depends largely on 
his willingness to take frequent 
shampoos, massage the scalp with 
prescribed lotions and ointments, and 
brush the hair daily. 

The doctor has other measures 
which he uses to shorten the treat¬ 
ment time. A new preparation, de¬ 
rived from selenium, has proved 
effective against many of the annoy¬ 
ing symptoms but should not be used 
without a doctor’s advice. 

The patient’s general health is 
significant, and rest, exercise, and 
proper hygiene are essential. Exces¬ 
sive fatigue, lack of sleep, anxiety 
and emotional strain may be involved 
in mducing the state which is con¬ 
ducive to the development of sebor¬ 
rhea. If necessary, the blood should 
be brought to normal by dietary 
supplements such as vitamins and 
iron. 

In cases in which nothing more 
serious than some scaling of the 
scalp is involved, a direct attack on 
the dandruff alone may be all that 
is required. The dandruff-prone per¬ 
son should shampoo his hair and 
scalp thoroughly at least once a week, 
bathe daily, and avoid wearing cloth¬ 
ing that overheats and softens the 
skin. 

If the oily condition becomes 
severe, the doctor may require special 
shampoos of oEve or similar oils 
and glycerin to remove the fatty 
covering of the scalp and make it 
accessible to treatment. Following 


663 



SENESCENCE 


SENESCENCE 


thiSs alkaline rinses of diluted borax 
and ammonia may be applied to re¬ 
duce the oiliness, although these 
rinses must be followed by an oily 
application to prevent irritation of the 
scalp. 

Seborrheic dermatitis^ the most 
severe form of seborrhea, is ordinarily 
a sequel to oily dandruff and skin. 
Treatment is difficult and must be 
varied to meet the particular con¬ 
dition encountered. A good daily 
hygienic routine is essential, with 
ample sleep, bathing, and a diet rich 
in protein. Vitamin B complex or 
vitamin B 12 m^y also prove beneficial. 
The doctor may use various special 
ointments, and antibiotics will help 
control infection if it occurs. 

SENESCENCE, the process of aging. 
As people grow older, their bodies 
undergo changes. The cells of the 
body begin to lose their power of re¬ 
pair, and the glands tend to function 
less efficiently. Digestion becomes 
disturbed, and the senses of taste, 
smell, sight, and hearing often weaken 
or begin to fail. In the aging process 
of the human body, the condition of 
the blood vessels is the most signifi¬ 
cant single factor. Hardening of the 
arteries, the wearing out of the 
muscular tissues of the blood vessels, 
and heart failure are the result of 
degenerative changes in the tissues. 
As the consequence of these changes, 
the body may either lose bulk or 
become corpulent. The bones are 
harder and more brittle, the hair 
grays and often falls out, the capacity 
for muscular and mental effort de¬ 
creases, and diseases affecting the 


circulatory system, heart, kidneys, 
lungs, and other organs begin to 

manifest themselves. 

Within the limits imposed by aging, 
medical science can do much for 
these disorders, and older persons 
should be examined by a doctor at 
frequent intervals. 

Many of the changes in the vision 
of older persons are due to changes 
in circulation, including hardening of 
the arteries. The pupil of the eye 
becomes smaller and less movable, 
and the color of the eyes becomes 
lighter. The lens of 'the eye grows 
and increases in weight throughout 
life, and a reduction in elasticity 
promotes the condition known as 
presbyopia, which is due to a loss of 
accommodation in the lens. Some¬ 
times a cataract, typical of old age, 
forms. The exact cause is not known, 
and the decision whether or not to 
remove a cataract depends on many 
factors related to the person’s mental 
and physical condition, as well as 
the actual condition of the eye. 

The eyelids of an older person de¬ 
velop wrinkles, and he seems to cry 
more easily, sometimes suffering 
from an excess of tears. This is often 
due to relaxation of tlie tissues of the 
eye, which do not hold the material 
as weE as do the tissues of younger 
persons. With surgical advances, 
techniques have been developed for 
maintaining the normal relationship 
between the tissues and overcoming 
the excess of tears. 

Like the rest of the body, the teeth 
and jaws are subject to change in 
old age. The Jaws change shape and 
the teeth tend either to fall out or 


664 



SEiMiLITY 


SENILITY 


require extraction. Artificial dentures 
often replace the loss of teeth. 

The functioning of the digestive 
system becomes less efficient as a 
person grows older, and frequently 
a simpler, more easily digested diet 
is preferred. Three meals a day 
should still be eaten, but they can be 
smaller. The diet, of course, should 
continue to be balanced, and vitamin 
or mineral supplements taken if 
necessary. Less protein is required 
for tissue repair, although foods 
which supply energy are still essential 
in sizable amounts. 

During late maturity, a thorough 
physical checkup is a wise precaution 
against disease in old age. Although 
aches and pains may multiply as one 
grows older, there are no diseases 
specifically caused by old age, and 
many maladies to which older per¬ 
sons are subject result from chronic 
diseases which occurred years be¬ 
fore. The diseases that take the 
greatest toll of life among the aged 
are heart diseases, cancer, and cere¬ 
bral hemorrhage. Other afflictions are 
arthritis, rheumatism, diabetes, pros¬ 
tatic enlargement, kidney diseases, 
hardening of the arteries, high blood 
pressure, and nervous and mental 
conditions. 

With the general advance in medi¬ 
cal science, more people are living 
longer. Thus older persons are coming 
to constitute an increasingly larger 
percentage of the population, and 
their particular problems are becom¬ 
ing of concern to more and more 
people. See also geriatrics; se¬ 
nility 


SENILITY^ the extreme stage of 
cerebral arteriosclerosis, which pro¬ 
duces in the aged symptoms ap¬ 
proaching dementia. The mind of the 
senile person becomes feeble and he 
may be so confused that he requires 
constant care and attention, and can¬ 
not be left alone. This condition is 
also marked by extreme forgetful¬ 
ness. In such moments, he may begin 
to do something in one part of the 
house and then suddenly go off to 
another room, forgetting what he 
had started out to do. In other 
instances, the senile person may 
wander away from Ms home and 
walk confusedly about, not even hav¬ 
ing presence of mind to ask direc¬ 
tions. 

Often the rest cycle is reversed, 
and the senile person sleeps during 
the day instead of at night. He 
will be active all night, moving about 
from room to room while the rest 
of the household sleeps. At day¬ 
break, drowsiness sets in and he may 
sleep and doze the rest of the day. 

In the most advanced stages of 
senility, all touch with reality may 
be lost and symptoms of dementia 
manifested. Coherent communication 
with others becomes impossible and 
helplessness, incontinence, and loss 
of brain function are noted. At tMs 
stage, hospitalization is often the 
best solution, and a large percentage 
of beds in mental institutions are 
devoted to senile persons. 

In treating senility, the doctor will 
check and prescribe accordingly for 
high blood pressure, overweight, and 
diabetes. Any correctable illness or 


665 



SEPTICEMIA 


SEPTIC SOiE THiOAT 


conditioE will also be treateds in- 
eluding diet deficiencies and anemia, 
both fairly coimnoii among senile 
persons^ In most cases, the teeth and 
digestion of the aged will be in such 
poor condition that a bland diet of 
chopped meats and strained and 
pureed ¥egetabies will be advised. 
An effort should be made to cater to 
the special tastes and preferences of 
the individual, who may be “cranky” 
about Ms food. In treating the re¬ 
versed sleep cycle, a combination of 
a mild stimulant in the morning and 
a moderate sedative at night is 
effected in most cases, although the 
situation may be fairly difficult to 
control. Tranquilizing drugs, among 
other measures, have been found 
effective in treatment of the extremely 
confused. Much remains to be learned 
and done in the care and treatment of 
senility. See also geriatrics; senes¬ 
cence. 

SEPTICEMIA, another word for 
bacteremia or blood poisoning. See 
BACTEREMIA. 

SEPTIC SORE THROAT, an acute 
infection of the throat caused by 
an organism, streptococcus hemo- 
iyticus. It is the most severe of all 
sore throats, and serious complica¬ 
tions may ensue if treatment is not 
prompt. 

Ordinarily the condition develops 
rapidly, starting with chill and fever 
that may go as high as 105° F. 
Swelling and soreness in and around 
the throat make it painful to swallow 
or even to move the head. As the 
infection spreads downward, the voice 
becomes hoarse, the breath short, 
and coughing begins. 


The most immediate danger is 
ulceration within the throat at the 
point of infection, or the formation 
of abscesses in the neck glands where 
the disease causes inflammation and 
swelling. Not infrequently the in¬ 
fection may go considerably further, 
invading the heart or abdomen and 
causing acute specific illness in those 
areas, or in other parts of the body. 

The disease is sometimes called 
epidemic septic sore throat, because 
it may be spread by sources of in¬ 
fection, such as contaminated milk, 
which affect numbers of people in a 
community. Adequate pasteurization 
will prevent this, but any defect in 
the pasteurization process may let 
through a batch of milk infected 
with the microorganisms which cause 
septic sore throat, as well as other 
diseases. This particular streptococcus 
infects cows and when it does is 
found on their udders. An infected 
milker may spread the disease, and 
milkers should always w^ash their 
hands before going to work and pref¬ 
erably also during the process. In¬ 
fected ice cream has been found to 
be the source of at least one epidemic. 
When a number of cases of septic 
sore throat are reported m a com¬ 
munity, health authorities suspect a 
common source of infection and 
often are able to trace it to one milk 
route and even to a particular herd 
of cattle. 

Antibiotics, such as peniciilin or 
aureomycin, are effective against the 
infection. Immediate bed rest for the 
duration of the illness is advised. Hot 
wet packs on the neck may help to 
combat the infection. Sprays, gargles, 
and other preparations applied di- 


666 



SEX EDUCATION 


SEX EDUCATION 


rectly to the throat are of IMe help. 
If swelliiig of the throat begins to 
interfere to any considerable extent 
with breathing, oxygen may be given. 
Despite its severity, fatalities from 
septic sore throat are infrequent be¬ 
cause of the accessibility of the in¬ 
fection to medical care. 

SEX EDUCATION. A child shows 
curiosity about his body and about 
sex at an early age, although in a 
different way and on a different level 
from an adult. Beginning about the 
age of three or four, the child will 
start asking questions, about himself 
and where he came from, which he 
has a right to do without fear or 
shame. The questions should be an¬ 
swered truthfully and straightfor¬ 
wardly, giving enough information 
to satisfy the child’s immediate curi¬ 
osity. In these early stages a gener¬ 
alized sentence or two is often 
adequate. 

Sex is fundamental in nature; it 
is perfectly normal for a child to 
wonder about it. The attitude toward 
sex which a child develops in his 
first five or six years is considered 
by many psychologists as one of the 
major factors in shaping his entire 
life and development. This attitude 
begins to be formed with the act of 
living, everything happening to the 
child and taking place about him 
leaving a subtle imprint. In this 
sense, many authorities say, sex 
education begins at home and at 
birth. 

How the parents feel toward sex 
and how they act toward each other 
is reflected in the child. If the 


mother associates sex with disgust 
or danger, if she feels '‘woman’s lot” 
is a burden and giving birth a sacri¬ 
fice, she may be laying the seeds of 
problems that will trouble the child 
in later life. Similarly, the father 
who treats his wife as inferior may 
instill in the child an attitude to¬ 
ward sex which can cause inner 
conflicts that lie hidden for years. 

The child early notices differences 
between men and women—in voice, 
in figure and dress, in a man’s pos¬ 
session of a beard, in the household 
functions which the father and 
mother perform. In a home in which 
there is warmth and love and truth¬ 
fulness, the child will feel free to 
ask questions about these differ¬ 
ences and about himself. If the pa¬ 
rent is embarrassed or evasive, or if 
the entire subject of sex is con¬ 
sidered taboo, the child, too, may 
come to regard sex or parts of his 
body with disgust or shame. In time 
the child may think of sex as 
“dirty,” instead of as a natural proc¬ 
ess in the continuation of life. 

One of the main difficulties 
parents find in answering a child’s 
questions is lack of an accurate 
vocabulary. The child who learns 
about sex from other children gen¬ 
erally learns words that are tinged 
with unpleasant associations. The 
parent wants to avoid this but often 
is blocked by not knowing the right 
words or the right approach. Know¬ 
ing accurate names will enable the 
parent to answer questions casually 
and simply, with neither innuendo 
nor embarrassment. Sex is every¬ 
where in nature, in plant as well as 


667 



SHINGLES 


SHOCK 


in bird and animal life and knowing 
the fundamentals of biology can 
provide the parent not only with a 
vocabulary but with an approach. 

The teaching of sex may use the 
vocabulary of science, but it is, 
especially in the early years, an art. 
The child should not be told until 
he asks; and, though he should be 
told the truth, he need not be told 
the whole truth. The child of four 
or five often does not want, nor can 
he comprehend, detailed informa¬ 
tion. A few words may be all he 
needs until they are absorbed and 
he comes up, perhaps many months 
later, with the next question. The 
truth that he is told is the truth as 
he can understand it. Thus, to a 
child of five who asks how Ms body 
was in his mother’s body, it is 
usually enough to say because of 
the love his father has for his 
mother. 

What is told to the child—in gen¬ 
eralities or by illustration in the ear¬ 
ly years, more detailed in adoles¬ 
cence—should be told casually. Sex 
is a part of living, and to the im¬ 
pressionable child the teaching of it 
should not be shown undue 
emphasis. 

If the child is given truthful, if 
simple, answers in his early years, 
he will be better prepared for the 
problems that arise in puberty. 
Changes crowd in at this time on 
the growing boy and girl, bringing 
in the train of physical transforma¬ 
tions a host of fresh questions, stir¬ 
rings, and often fears. The child 
now needs straightforward explana¬ 


tions of the physical changes, and 
needs, further, to understand that the 
sex urge is natural, that it appears 
in everyone and is necessary for the 
continuation of the race. 

The child thus prepared will ac¬ 
cept the changes without fear or 
shame or shock. Girls, maturing 
earlier than boys, will need to be 
prepared earlier since menstruation 
without preparation can be a shock¬ 
ing experience. Similarly, the boy 
who does not understand why it is 
taking place, may experience fear 
or disgust at the onset of the noc¬ 
turnal emission. 

For parents who want to provide 
the child with sex education from 
the outset, but are doubtful about 
the proper way to do it, books are 
available on the subject. But the 
best teaching is by example. A sound 
basic attitude toward sex and life, 
a proper fulfilling of the role of 
father and mother, are more impor¬ 
tant to the development of the child 
than just scientific fact or finding. 
See also conception; condom; 
contraception; fallopian tubes; 
fertility; hymen; hysterectomy; 
impotence; marriage; meno¬ 
pause; menstruation; orgasm; 
ovaries; ovulation; penis; pros¬ 
tate; sterility; testicles; uter¬ 
us; vagina; vulva. 

SHINGLES. See herpes zoster. 

SHOCKs the condition caused by 
acute failure of the peripheral circu¬ 
lation, the circulation of the Mood in 
the veins and in the capillaries 


668 



SHOCK TiEATMENT 


SHOULDEi 


farthest from the hearts The essential 
functions of the body are diminished. 
Shock may occur during times of 
great emotional stress^ injury^ pain^ 
sudden illness and accident, such as 
bums, and has been one of the most 
difficult emergencies to confront phy¬ 
sicians. 

It is believed by most doctors that 
loss of blood is the cause of shock in 
most cases, and therefore treatment 
of shock emphasizes maintaining the 
blood supply through use of blood 
plasma by transfusion. 

The first change that occurs in 
shock is dilation of the blood vessels 
on the surface. When this happens, 
the person begins to sweat, while Ms 
skin is relatively warm. His blood 
pressure falls and his pulse becomes 
slow and feeble. 

The victim of shock should first of 
all be placed with his head low, since 
a loss of blood from the brain may 
result in failure of the brain to 
function. If the state of shock con¬ 
tinues over a period of even a few 
hours, it may be fatal or cause 
permanent impairment of the brain. 
He must be kept comfortably warm. 
Pain, wMch may be a contributing 
factor to the intensity of shock, is 
relieved by sedative drugs. 

A secondary shock due to damage 
of the tissues follows the initial shock 
from a wound or injury, and may be 
apparent an hour or more after an 
injury. A person in secondary shock 
is pale, weak, exhausted, and, if 
conscious, may complain of thirst. 
His perspiration is cold and clammy, 
pulse rapid and thready and breathing 


rapid and shaEow, blood pressure 
low and the superficial blood vessels 
collapsed. Secondary shock is seen 
mainly after severe bums or as a late 
manifestation of a surgical operation. 

In shock following burns, the 
patient, if conscious, should be given 
salt and soda in water (1 quart of 
cold water, 1 teaspoon of salt, and V 2 
teaspoon of baking soda) to replace 
the salty fluids lost from the tissues. 
This is only a first-aid measure to be 
taken until the doctor arrives. 

Patients suffering from diabetic or 
insulin shock require special treat¬ 
ment which only a doctor can ad¬ 
minister. 

In surgery, continuous transfusion 
of blood or plasma is sometimes a 
part of the operative procedure. It 
greatly lessens the incidence of shock. 
See also insulin shock therapy. 

SHOCK TREATMENT, See elec¬ 
tric SHOCK treatment; insulin 
SHOCK treatment. 

SHOULDER, a Joint of the ball- 
and-socket type, constructed of bones 
held in position by powerful muscles, 
tendons, and ligaments. Because of its 
unique structure, it has a greater 
range of movement than any other 
joint in the body. However, the 
shoulder is unsupported from beneath 
and is therefore subject to dislocation 
in this direction. 

The shoulder joint is easily injured 
and may become stiff and painful 
from a number of causes. When 
this occurs, the person usually must 
cease all activity for a time, as 
further movement will Intensify the 
injury. Frequently a torn tendon 


669 



smusES 


SINUSES 


may cause pain and stiffnesso The 
tendon may be tom as a result of 
dislocation, fail^ or strain. Infection 
of the bursa, or sacs^ in the shoulder 
region may produce inflammatioii 
which inhibits movement of the 
shoulder. 

Fractures of any of the bones in 
the shoulder require surgical treat¬ 
ment. Dislocation demands setting 
of the bones and immobilization by 
means of bandaging or placing the 
shoulder in a cast. Immobilization is 
also essential in case of intense pain 
due to sprain, severe infection, or 
torn ligament, and usually it is ex¬ 
pedient to place the arm in a sling 
which will enable it to be supported 
close to the side. In most cases, this 
is all the treatment required. A splint 
and plaster cast to hold the arm 
raised and away from the body, the 
abductor position, may be desirable 
in other cases. After removal of 
splints and casts, heat, massage, and 
exercise will help prevent loss of 
function and restore mobility. Re¬ 
current dislocation of the shoulder is 
fairly common, especially among 
athletes, and surgery is practically the 
only conclusive treatment for this 
condition. Subsequently the shoulder 
must be placed in a cast and after its 
removal appropriate exercise is re¬ 
quired to restore normal function. 

‘‘Frozen shoulder” is a disorder 
involving the bursas and tendonous 
tissue, and it produces extreme pain 
and stiffness. Rest is of utmost sig¬ 
nificance and application of heat is 
often helpful. When calcium is de¬ 
posited in the area, hydrocortisone 
or similar drugs may be injected. 


Gentle exercise and heat help to re¬ 
store normal function, and in some 
cases such treatment is required for 
a long time. See also arthritis; 
bursitis; dislocation; joints and 

JOINT DISEASES. 

SINUSES^ cavities or channels within 
bones. Those in the head which con¬ 
nect with the inside of the nose by 
narrow passageways sometimes cause 
trouble. The sinus in the cheekbone 
is called the antrum, the one above 
the eyes is the frontal sinus, and 
deeper behind the nose is the ethmoid 
sinus, which is actually a series of 
small sinuses, varying from three to 
more than fifteen in some cases. 

The membranes of the sinuses are 
susceptible to infection. If the open¬ 
ing of the sinus into the nose becomes 
blocked, the infectious matter will 
cause symptoms of sinusitis, which 
include headache, pain, and, when 
the infection is absorbed into the 
body, high fever. An ordinary cold 
may end in a few days, but if the 
sinuses become infected the symp¬ 
toms may last for many weeks. 
Eventually the sinus disorder may 
become chronic, with an increase in 
the intensity of the original infection. 

The doctor usually treats an in¬ 
fection of the sinuses by cleansing 
the nose and shrinking the mem¬ 
branes by applying vasoconstrictors 
such as epinephrine. He then deter¬ 
mines whether or not the infectious 
material is draining from the sinuses 
into the nose. X-rays will indicate 
whether there is any blocking or 
polyps or tumorous growth. Infec¬ 
tion may be controlled with drops. 


670 



SINySiS 


spraysj or application of medickal 
packs. Drugs may be given orally, or 
applied directly to the nose by wash¬ 
ing out the sinuses. Sometimes surgi¬ 
cal procedures are advisable. Current 
treatment with drugs, such as the 
sulfonamides, penicMlin, and other 
antibiotics, has practially eliminated 
surgery. Occasionally, however, cer¬ 
tain complications may necessitate 
operation to improve drainage or 
destroy an abscess. When polyps are 
growing in the sinuses, ACTH, 
cortisone, and similar hormone prod¬ 
ucts have been successfully used. 

Allergenic substances are some¬ 
times responsible for sinus disorders, 
and the doctor may prescribe anti- 
histaminic drugs. In chronic sinus 
infections, vaccines have been help¬ 
ful once the particular type of germ 

Sinuses—The sinuses, which surround the 
nose including the frontal sinuses, the maxil¬ 
lary sinuses on each side, and the ethmoid 
sinus in back of the nose, help in various 
ways the physiology of the body. The mu¬ 
cous membrane that Imes the sinuses is 
much thinner than that of the nasal cavity 
In this mucous membrane are cells called 
goblet cells which pour out a substance 
called mucus This mucus is ordinarily elimi¬ 
nated from the sinuses by the movement of 
the tiny hairs that line its walls. If the open¬ 
ings of the sinuses are not blocked by in¬ 
flammation or swelling, drainage of mucus 
goes on constantly and with it foreign ma¬ 
teria! such as germs passes into the nasal 
cavity and the throat The functions of the 
sinuses shown symbolically in the three 
drawings are 1) fl?e provision of moisture 
and warmth to air that is taken into the 
body (fopK 2) drainage of material from 
these open areas in the skull cavity which 
help to lessen the weight of the skull and 
maintain balance on the neck fcenferJ, and 
3) the resonance that is givers by the sinuses 
to the voice exactly as a resonant chamber 
may be used to heighten and broaden the 
tone for radio amplification (bottom) 





SKELETON 


SKIN 


responsible has been determined. In 
time, resistance to the infection will 
develop. 

Persons with acute or chronic in¬ 
fections of the sinuses should avoid 
swimming, diving, and strenuous out¬ 
door exercise. Particularly obstinate 
cases of sinus infection may improve 
in a hot dry climate. 

SKELETON^ in the human body, is 
the bones or the body framework 
which support the soft tissue and pro¬ 
tect the internal organs. The body’s 
bony framework may be described as 
consisting of axial and appendicular 
sets of bones. The head, the ribs and 
breastbone, and the spinal column 
form the axial part, and the arms and 
legs are the appendages. Two bony 
girdles, the shoulder and the pelvic 
girdle, connect the axis and the 
appendages. 

The two innominate bones form 
the pelvic girdle, which is actually 
made into a rigid girdle by the 
sacrum. The shoulder girdle, which 
is formed by the scapula and the 
clavicle, is incomplete in front and 
behind, but supported in front by the 
uppermost part of the sternum, the 
breastbone. 

The upper limb is attached to the 
axial skeleton by the clavicle and 
scapula. The lower limb is attached by 
the innominate bones, which are 
jointed in front to one another and 
at the back to the sacrum, the lower 
end of the spine. 

These elements, with their com¬ 
ponent bones, comprise the skeleton. 
Altogether 206 bones form the adult 
human skeleton, including the tiny 


bones of the middle ear. The skeleton 
is a complex structure of bones and 
Joints, and its movements are made 
possible by the skeletal muscles which 
are attached to their respective bones 
by tendons. Tendons anchor muscles 
to bone by means of connective tissue 
fibers which enter the bone structure. 
Together the skeleton and muscles 
have a great part in body func¬ 
tion, since every body movement, 
voluntary and involuntary, depends 
on the skeletal and muscular systems. 

Disorders of the skeleton embrace 
the various infections, inflamniations, 
and diseases, including cancer, that 
may attack the bones. Sprains of the 
ligaments binding bones together 
may occur, debility as in foot strain 
or flat feet, or dislocations and frac¬ 
tures of bones or joints. Arthritis and 
rheumatism may attack the bones 
and joints. Various mechanical de¬ 
fects, such as curvature of the spine, 
can develop, or congenital deficiencies 
may present difficulty later in, life. 
See also arthritis; bones; disloca¬ 
tion; fractures; joints and joint 
disorders; spine; vertebra. 

SKIN, the largest single organ in the 
body, forming a protective covering 
over it. The skin of an adult person 
weighs about six pounds and if 
spread flat would cover an area of 
about 16 to 20 square feet. 

Externally the s,kin is furrowed. 
The furrows are formed by the 
attachment of the skin to the struc¬ 
tures beneath and by the movement 
of the skin, and remain constant for 
each person. Between the furrows are 
ridges which are dotted with the 


672 



SKIN 


SKIN 



Skin—A cross section of skm showing (1) outer layer, (2) arteries, (3) capillaries, (4) veins, 
(5) fat tissue, (6) hair root, (7) hair shaft, (8) oil gland, (9) hair, (10) hair muscle, (11) sweat 
gland, and (12) touch nerve 


openings of the pores which release 
perspiration through the skin. 

The sMn of the palms of the 
hands and the soles of the feet is 
thicker than the skin on other parts 
of the body. The lines on the fingers 
which form an impression called a 
fingerprint consist of rows of papillae 
in the true skin projecting into the 
epidermis. If part of the epidermis is 
lost, the new epidermis that forms 
will show exactly the same arrange¬ 
ment of lines as before. 

The structure of the skin is com¬ 
posed of three layers: an outer layer 
called the cuticle; the next layer 
which is the true skin; and the lowest 
layer where the blood and lymph 
vessels and similar structures vital to 
the health and life of the skin are 
located. Here, also, are some of the 
glands and roots of hair follicles. The 
skin receives one-third of all of the 
blood that circulates. 


The skin is constantly renewing it¬ 
self from birth to death. The outer¬ 
most layers are detached as the lower 
layers produce new cells. Billions of 
new cells are produced every day 
while billions of horny dead cells are 
shed by the body. There are thirty 
layers of cells which are constantly 
being added to from below and shed 
from above. 

One of the chief functions of the 
skin is to maintain a constant temper¬ 
ature through evaporation of heat 
from the body. The amount of heat 
radiated depends on the external 
temperature. Other glands in the skin 
secrete an oil which maintains the 
skin in a flexible condition. Each 
square inch of surface on the palms 
of the hands has more than 5,000 
sweat glands. The skin also excretes 
waste material, helps prevent loss of 
body fluids, and is the fundamental 
sensory organ. Hair on the body 


673 



SKIN 


SKIN 


originates from hair follicles em¬ 
bedded in the skin. 

The skin is an organ of the body 
as much as the liver^ hearty or lungs. 
When the flow of blood to the skin 
is hindered for any reason, the skin 
becomes harder, thicker, and loses 
its normal appearance. In old age, 
when blood circulation to the skin 
decreases, the skin loses its youthful 
appearance, wrinkles form, and the 
color changes. 

The color of the skin is determined 
largely by melanin, a dark pigment. 
The amount of melanin varies with 
each person, but depends largely on 
heredity. The action of sunlight also 
is significant because exposure to 
the sun stimulates a greater produc¬ 
tion of melanin in the skin which 
causes tanning, or freckles if un¬ 
evenly distributed. The circulation 
of blood through the skin gives it a 
pink or “flesh” color. A person may 
appear pale when anemic or ruddy 
when the amount of blood in the 
capillaries is increased. 

Fingernails and toenails are actu¬ 
ally modifications of the skin, and 
the mucous membranes found in 
body cavities such as the mouth, 
nose, digestive tract, and eyes are also 
modified skin. Mucous membrane 
differs from outer skin in many ways, 
principally in the secretion of mu¬ 
cus. 

Any inflammation of the skin is 
called dermatitis. Although some 
forms of dermatitis are due to seri¬ 
ous internal causes, 95 per cent of 
the cases of disturbed skin are simple 
irritations due to infection or some 
external cause. 


A change in the skin is a charac¬ 
teristic of many deficiency diseases. 
Vitamins have a definite relationship 
to the skin and at least six skin con¬ 
ditions are connected to vitamin de¬ 
ficiencies. For example, a vitamin 
B 2 (riboflavin) deficiency will cause 
blisters and cracking at the comers 
of the mouth. A deficiency of vita¬ 
min C leads to scurvy with hemor¬ 
rhages in the gums and skin. A vita¬ 
min A deficiency results in dryness 
of the skin and hair, although most 
people who have dry skin and hair 
do not have this deficiency. Prac¬ 
tically every skin disease has at one 
time or another been treated by some 
kind of diet. Psoriasis, for example, 
has been treated with doses of vita¬ 
min D, but it is a stubborn ailment 
and its cause is not yet known. Urti¬ 
caria and various forms of eczema 
which are allergies to certain proteins 
are definitely related to diet. 

Many different diets have been 
tried in treatment of blackheads, 
pimples, and acne—for instance, 
diets without meat, without sugar, or 
without fats. At present most skin 
specialists agree that a low-fat diet 
is beneficial, since in many cases of 
acne an overactivity of the oil glands 
of the skin is present. Many cases of 
acne, however, are unaffected by 
foods. Particular foods seem to ag¬ 
gravate some acne, most frequently 
chocolate, nuts, shellfish, peanuts, 
pork and pork products, milk and 
milk products and sharp cheese. The 
only conclusion that may be drawn 
is that acne cannot be controlled by 
diet alone, but that a well-balanced 
diet is certainly an important part of 


674 



SKULL 


SKULL 


maintaining healthy attractive skin. 

Certain illnesses induce various ab¬ 
normalities of skin structure known 
as primary or secondary lesions. The 
primary lesions include papules, 
vesicles, pustules, bullae, and scales. 
The secondary lesions, which result 
from a primary condition, include 
atrophy, pigmentation, sclerosis or 
hardening, ulceration, crusts, and 
lichens. 

Normal skin will thrive well with 
nothing more than a reasonable 
amount of cleanliness. The skin of a 
baby requires more care than that of 
an adult, since it is more easily irri¬ 
tated. Women, especially, are con¬ 
cerned with the appearance of their 
skin and are often susceptible to the 
advertising claims of various prod¬ 
ucts for the skin. However, no sub¬ 
stance applied to the skin can “feed 
it,” and any benefit derived is only 
superficial and temporary. A sub¬ 
stance powerful enough to actually 
alter the skin would be completely 
unsafe to use. See also acne; acne 
rosacea; cosmetics; dermatitis; 
eczema; nails; pigmentation; 
psoriasis; ringworm; tattooing. 

SKULL, the entire bony framework 
of the head, consisting of the cranium 
and the face. The cranium is made 
up of the frontal bone, the front 
part of the cranium, the occipital 
which lies behind, and the sphenoid, 
temporal, and parietal bones at the 
side. The roof or vault is formed by 
the frontal and parietal bones, and 
the base of the skull by the occipital, 
temporal, sphenoid, and ethmoid 
bones. 


The occipital bone has a large 
opening through which the brain 
IS connected with the spinal cord; in 
addition, other openings provide for 
the passage of numerous nerves and 
blood vessels. 

The bones of the face fit closely 
beneath the orbits of the eyes, around 
the nasal cavities and mouth, and in 
the cheek. 

The skull of a baby is thin and 
soft. The bones that form the vault of 
the newborn baby’s skull are sepa¬ 
rated and the membranous space be¬ 
tween is called fontanelle. The move¬ 
ment of these bones affects the shape 
of the head, which may be tem¬ 
porarily altered by molding during 
birth. 

Various diseases may provoke 
changes in the shape of the head, such 
as rickets, hydrocephalus, aero- 
megaly, and osteitis deformans, and 
some birth injuries and congenital de¬ 
formities also affect the shape. 

The skull is subject to fractures of 
two types: the closed or simple frac¬ 
ture, and the open or compound 
fracture. Simple fractures vary from 
a small fracture line to extensive 
cracking of the bones throughout the 
skull. Simple fractures may be com¬ 
plicated if one of the pieces of bone 
presses on the brain. Other compli¬ 
cations occur when the fracture 
crosses a major artery or vein or 
involves a cranial nerve. In most 
simple fractures, healing progresses 
without much treatment, but special 
surgery is usually imperative in cases 
of fracture across a major artery. 
Compound fractures of the skull are 


675 



SLEEP 


SLIPPED DISC 


more serious and care must be taken 
to guard against meningitis. Sulfa 
drugs and antibiotics have been help¬ 
ful in reducing the incidence of this 
infection in skull fractures. See also 
brain; concussion; head injuries. 

SLEEP^ the periodic state of rest 
during which there is a noticeable 
decrease of consciousness and ac¬ 
tivity. The average person requires 
sleep just as he does food, and the 
demand for sleep is as regular as that 
for food. During sleep, the body has 
an opportunity to repair itself, to 
get rid of wastes that have accumu¬ 
lated in the tissues during the day. 
The rate of metabolism during sleep 
is at its lowest point, being sufficient 
only to keep the vital parts of the 
body in operation. Blood pressure 
drops, the pulse rate slows down, 
breathing is irregular and slackened. 
The body is less sensitive to pain, 
light, and sound. Even the tempera¬ 
ture is somewhat lower than during 
waking hours. 

An infant sleeps almost all of the 
time, awakening usually only for 
feeding. A child of two or three years 
of age should sleep twelve or thirteen 
hours a day. Seven or eight hours of 
sleep is usually adequate for an adult. 
More hours of sleep are required in 
the early years of life, since the body 
tissues Wild reserves of energy dur¬ 
ing sleep necessary to meet the 
greater demands of the growing body. 
The aged person usually sleeps only 
about six hours at night; occasionally 
four hours’ sleep seems to be ade¬ 
quate. The amount of sleep needed 
varies among people, but everyone 


should have enough to awaken rested 
and refreshed. See also narcolepsy; 
senility; somnambulism. 

SLEEPING SICKNESS. en¬ 

cephalitis. 

SLEEPLESSNESS. insomnia, 

SLIPPED DISC« The backbone as an 
integrated system is so designed and 
put together that it breaks only under 
the most extraordinary and violent 
shocks. It can support a weight far 
larger than that of the body of which 
it is a part, and can move this body 
in practically any direction. In addi¬ 
tion, the backbone is capable of a 
range of movements extending from a 
stevedore’s lift to an acrobat’s con¬ 
tortions and a ballet dancer’s deli¬ 
cacy and discipline. 

The intervertebral disc, a little 
cushion of cartilage that lies between 
every second vertebra of the spinal 
column, makes all this possible. The 
center of each disc is composed of a 
special material called nucleus pul- 
posus, which tends to move about 
slightly in correspondence to move¬ 
ments of the body. These discs cush¬ 
ion the body and especially the head 
against direct impact of the shock of 
walking which a solid bone would 
transmit. They also permit an ease 
and degree of rotation of the verte¬ 
brae which would otherwise be im¬ 
possible. 

The functions and changes in these 
discs have only recently been com¬ 
prehended. The “Jeep disease” of 
World War II, a severe and persistent 
back pain associated with constant 
riding in a jeep over rough roads, led 


676 



SMALLPOX 


SMALLPOX 


to medical investigation which proved 
that the pain was caused by disloca¬ 
tion of one of the Intervertebral discs 
wMch had been squeezed or bumped 
out of position by violent movement. 
Sometimes the nucleus pulposus mp- 
tureSs loses liquid^ and contributes to 
the squeezing that displaces the disc. 

Occasionally a disc is displaced 
during common experiences of every¬ 
day life. An automobile accident may 
throw a sudden and excessive shock 
on the spine and cause an injury at 
first not apparent, A bumpy airplane 
landing may have the same effect. 
Many forms of athletic exercise in¬ 
volve some risk of injuring a disc. 
Activities, such as football, baseball, 
and gymnastic work which subject 
the spine to frequent sharp heavy 
shocks while the back is in an unusual 
position tend to do this most fre¬ 
quently. 

The detection of a dislocated disc 
is not a simple matter and may re¬ 
quire prolonged study. The injury is 
not apparent through simple explora¬ 
tion with the fingers. X-ray and care¬ 
ful review of the symptoms will help 
the doctor make a diagnosis. 

Rest, wearing braces, and surgery 
are all alternative remedies for the 
condition. The doctor’s judgment 
alone can determine the best treat¬ 
ment. 

SMALLPOX, or variola, a conta¬ 
gious infectious disease, often fatal, 
with fever followed by a papular 
eruption which produces pitted scars. 
The introduction of vaccination, de¬ 
veloped by the English physician Ed¬ 
ward Jenner in 1796, and the more 


recently improved techniques for 
quarantine and isolation have brought 
smallpox almost completely under 
control and it is now comparatively 
rare. It still occurs in the Far East 
and in some tropical countries. In 
1947 an imported case in New York 
City spread to eleven people before 
it was controlled. 

The virus of smaUpox is present 
in the discharge from the nose and 
throat, in blisters on the skin, in the 
scabs that eventually faE off, and in 
the excretions from the body. The 
disease may spread from any of these 
sources, which accounts for the ease 
and rapidity with which the disease 
infects anyone who is not immune. 

The incubation period is generally 
eight to twelve days. Smallpox be¬ 
gins with violent headache, chiE, 
pain in the back and limbs and a 
high fever, and, in chEdren, convul¬ 
sions and vomiting. Within three or 
four days small reddened pimples 
appear over the face and wrists and 
spread rapidly to the arms and chest. 
These form blisters in a day or two 
and in about eight or nine days be¬ 
gin to dry, leaving a blackish crust. 
The face swells and feels irritated and 
the rash, particularly on the face, can 
be agonizing. The eyelids may be 
swoEen shut. After three or four 
weeks the crusts faE off and the 
characteristic pitting scars or pock¬ 
marks of smallpox remain. 

Complications caused by bacterial 
infection result in bronchopneu¬ 
monia, conjunctivitis, or more serious 
damage to the eyes or middle ear. 

Since smallpox is one of the most 


677 



SMELL 


SNEEZING 


contagious diseases known, isolation 
and strict quarantine are essential. 
It can spread not only during the 
course of the illness but also during 
the long convalescent period which 
follows. Clothing, bed linens, and 
any object which the patient has 
handled carry the infection. Any per¬ 
son who has been in contact with a 
smallpox patient should be vacci¬ 
nated, unless he has had a vaccina¬ 
tion during the previous five years. 
Vaccination may even protect the 
patient if it is done during the early 
incubation period, and may, if effec¬ 
tive, result in milder symptoms. One 
attack of smallpox gives lifelong 
immunity. 

The immunity gained by vaccina¬ 
tion is temporary and vaccinations 
must therefore be repeated at five- 
to seven-year intervals. The first vac¬ 
cination is generally given between 
the ages of three months and one 
year and is repeated between the 
ages of seven and eleven years, espe¬ 
cially if an epidemic is present or if 
travel is planned to areas where the 
disease is more common than in the 
United States. See also immunity; 
immunization; infection; infec¬ 
tious diseases; vaccination, 

SMELL, the perception of odor. The 
degree of perceptiveness varies 
among persons, some having a highly 
developed sense of smell and others 
having very little. Sense of smell ap¬ 
pears to be less significant to persons 
than, for example, sense of sight or 
hearing, and a total loss of the ol¬ 
factory sense usually requires little 
adjustment. 


To test olfactory sensitivity, well- 
defined odors are used. A person with 
a high sensitivity can detect camphor 
in a solution of 1:30,000,000 and 
vanilla in a solution of 1:10,000,000. 
Apparently the strongest odor is that 
of mercaptan, a derivative of alcohol 
in which oxygen is replaced by sul¬ 
phur. It can be detected when 
1/23,000,000th of a milligram is 
present in a quart of water. 

Loss of the sense of smell is called 
anosmia. See also anosmia; nose, 
diseases of; ozena. 

SNEEZING, a natural reflex action 
involving a deep intake of breath fol¬ 
lowed by closure of the glottis; the 
mechanism is similar to that of a 
cough. A violent expiration effort en¬ 
sues, the glottis opens, a blast of air 
is sent out through the nose, taking 
with it mucus and other material. 
Frequently the eyes water immedi¬ 
ately following a sneeze. 

Paroxysms of sneezing and water¬ 
ing eyes are characteristic of hay 
fever and other allergic conditions. 
A sneeze may occur without an irri¬ 
tant, such as when a person stares 
at a bright sky or stands barefoot on 
a cold floor. Sneezes can often be 
suppressed by placing a steady pres¬ 
sure between the nose and lip with 
one or two fingers. 

Sneezing can be a symptom of a 
common cold or of some respiratory 
disease such as influenza. Since a 
sneeze disseminates virus or bacteria, 
it should always be covered with a 
handkerchief or tissue. 

In cases of persistent sneezing the 
nose should be examined by a doc- 


675 



SNOilNG 


SOtE THiOAT 


tor^ since a disordered septain or 
other source of irritation may exist 
which requires special attention. 
Treatment of sneezing always in- 
¥ol¥es treating the underlying condi¬ 
tion. 

SNORING, the rough audible sound 
made by breathing through the nose 
in such a way as to cause a vibration 
of the soft palate. The noise made 
by snoring is due to the intermittent 
passage of air at places in the mouth 
where there may be partial obstrac- 
tion. Adenoids sometimes cause snor¬ 
ing, especially in children. 

Snoring can occur in several ways. 
During sleep a partial relaxation of 
the muscles holding the vocal cords 
may occur so that they fall closely 
together and interfere with the pas¬ 
sage of air. Or, when a person is 
sleeping deeply or is unconscious, 
and lying on his back, the tongue 
may fall back and partially close the 
opening through which air passes. 
This is what causes the noisy breath¬ 
ing called stertor which occurs in 
concussions and apoplexy. 

Sometimes, because of irritation 
or inflammation, mucus may collect 
in the nose or in the passages behind 
the nose, or the muscles associated 
with the nose and throat may be ab¬ 
normally tense and interfere with 
passage of air. If the nose is blocked 
and the lips are held tightly together, 
a whistling sound occurs as the air 
passes out. 

Snoring sounds seldom disturb the 
person snoring. Often he will stop 
snoring if, when he is lying on his 
back, he is turned to the side. Clos¬ 
ing Ms mouth, or pushing the lower 


jaw forward and with it the base of 
the tongue, is sometimes effective. 

SODIUM BICAMIONATE, also 
known as baking soda, a white crys¬ 
talline powder. Given as an antacid, 
it overcomes excess acidity of the 
juices of the stomach and excess 
acidity of the body generally. In cases 
of acidosis, which may be due to 
diabetes or another condition, large 
doses of baking soda may be taken 
orally. Because it can liquefy mucus, 
a sodium bicarbonate-water solution 
is sometimes used to cleanse the nose 
and other mucous surfaces. A lotion 
made of a teaspoon of baking powder 
to a pint of water helps to relieve 
itching, and a baking soda bath may 
be beneficial in helping similar con¬ 
ditions. 

SOMNAMBULISM refers to a sleep 
or sleeplike state during which walk¬ 
ing or other activities are performed. 
It is fairly common in children. In 
adults it is rarer and of more serious 
significance. Usually sleepwalking 
stems from some conflict in the mind 
wMch is unresolved and continues to 
stimulate the person even during the 
period of sleep. Usually when the 
person’s doubt or fear is removed— 
wMch, in serious cases, may require 
psychiatric help—^the sleepwalking 
ceases. A person awakened during 
sleepwalking is usually perplexed and 
distressed. He should not be criticized 
or scolded, but consoled and returned 
to bed. 

SORE THROAT refers to inflamma¬ 
tion of the pharynx, called pharyn¬ 
gitis, or of the tonsils, called tonsilli¬ 
tis. In a common cold, the soreness 

679 



SFAHiSH FLY 


SPEECH 


is usually in tlie back wall of the 
upper throat and affects the naso¬ 
pharynx and the palate. See also 
COMMON cold; hoarseness; laryn¬ 
gitis; pharynx; quinsy; septic sore 

THROAT, 

SPANISH FLY. See cantharides. 

SPASMj an involuntary sudden con¬ 
traction of a muscle. The usual cause 
is irritation of the nerve cells or 
nerves which supply the muscle. A 
sustained contraction is called tonic. 
If contraction and relaxation rapidly 
alternate, it is a clonic spasm. A 
general spasm over the body is a 
convulsion or fit. Massive spasms are 
characterized by sudden movements 
which involve most of the body mus¬ 
culature and last from a fraction of 
a second to several seconds. They 
may affect infants and young chil¬ 
dren. The commonest form of spasm 
is one in which the limbs and trunk 
are suddenly flexed, foEowed by re¬ 
laxation. SimEar attacks may occur 
in series. 

Almost anyone can at some time 
have a muscle spasm. Sudden chiE- 
ing of the body during swimming 
may cause a muscle spasm, or when¬ 
ever the circulation of the blood in 
any part of the body is greatly di¬ 
minished sudden involuntary con¬ 
tractions may occur. Disorders in 
the nervous system—for example, 
the death of a nerve cell in the 
interior portion of the spinal cord— 
may result in paralysis of the mus¬ 
cles with spasm of the opposing mus¬ 
cles. 

Sometimes chEdren develop habit 
spasms—^not to be confused with 


chorea or St, Vitus® dance. The move¬ 
ments of habit spasm are quicker 
and always repeated in the same way, 
whereas the movements of chorea are 
irregular and variable. Spasms in 
children may sometimes occur as a 
result of distress, such as tear of 
punishment. 

Whenever a spasm of the muscle 
occurs, examination by a doctor is 
necessary to determine the source, if 
it is a condition affecting the nerves, 
medical or surgical management may 
be required. In some instances, in¬ 
jection of one of various substances 
around the nerves of the area in¬ 
volved is the only treatment to stop a 
spasm. See also chorea; convul¬ 
sion; HABIT spasm; tic DOULOUREUX. 

SPEECH, the faculty of uttering ar¬ 
ticulate sounds to express thought. 
The centers of the brain involving the 
capacity for speech are in the cortex. 
An injury or disease that interferes 
with ceUs of the cortex or with fibers 
that link them, as in aphasia, hinders 
the thought processes of speech. 

Sound is produced by vibrations of 
the vocal cords as air rushes through 
the larynx. In laryngitis, the vocal 
cords are affected and the voice be¬ 
comes a whisper. Paralysis of the 
cords causes complete loss of voice, 
or aphonia. The voice may be sud¬ 
denly lost in hysteria. Here the cords 
remain normal and the cause is emo¬ 
tional. 

Sound produced by the larynx is 
modified by articulatioii, which in¬ 
volves alterations in the shape of the 
mouth and pharynx and movements 
of the teeth, tongue, and palate. The 


680 



SPINA BIFIDA 


SPINA BIFIDA 


nerve centers wMch control articula¬ 
tion are in the medulla and are con¬ 
nected with the speech centers in the 
cortex. Articulation may be affected 
wholly or partially by damage in 
these areas. 

Lisping, stammering, and stutter¬ 
ing are speech defects which can be 
corrected by training and various ex¬ 
ercises. Speech defects caused by 
harelip or cleft palate may be cor¬ 
rected by surgical treatment, or pros¬ 
thesis. Surgeons, psychologists, oto¬ 
laryngologists, speech therapists— 
all can help in the correction of 
faulty speech. 

Learning to talk is a sign of a 
child’s mental development, but de¬ 
layed speech should be no cause for 
alarm unless it is due to mental de¬ 
fect or deafness. If a child still does 
not speak by the age of one year, he 
should be taken to a doctor so that 
his healing and general intelligence 
may be tested. Children learn to 
speak by imitation and will adopt the 
accents, inflections, and mannerisms 
of those aroimd them. The best way 
to encourage correct speech in a child 
is to listen with interest to what 
he has to say, making as few correc¬ 
tions in his speech as possible, and 
speak to him in a modulated, articu¬ 
late, and correct way. 

Here are seven rules which parents 
should follow in developing habits 
of good speech in their children: 

1. Do not correct the child’s pro¬ 
nunciation or enunciation. Praise 
that which is correct, but do not 
stress that which is wrong. 

2. Do not imitate the child’s baby 
talk. By doing this, you simply con¬ 


firm him in his error. If you speak 
good English, he will imitate it as 
soon as he can. 

3. Never “talk down” to babies 
and little children. 

4. Do not nag, coax, or raise your 
voice in an effort to get the baby to 
talk. Speech will come naturally. 

5. If any of the baby’s relatives or 
playmates or you stammer, give the 
baby an opportunity to learn to talk 
from someone else. Children imitate 
what they hear. 

6. Give the child a chance to learn 
to talk and listen to hitn when he 
talks. This will encourage him. 

7. Tell the child to listen. How¬ 
ever, do not ignore him but include 
him whenever possible in the con¬ 
versation. 

See also aphasia; stuttering and 
STAMMERING. 

SPINA BIFIDA. An essential step in 
the development of the human em¬ 
bryo before birth is the growing to¬ 
gether of two sides of the original 
channel in the back, thus forming 
the space where the spinal cord will 
lie. Failure of these to grow together 
results in a structural condition 
known as spina bifida, meaning liter¬ 
ally a split spine. 

This condition occurs in approxi¬ 
mately one in every 1,000 births, but 
the specific form of the defect always 
varies. Ordinarily spina bifida will be 
only a gap in the coverings which 
should enclose the spinal cord. In 
other instances, however, one or more 
vertebrae may be absent. This de¬ 
formity may be accompanied by a 
bulge in the sheathing of the spinal 
cord projecting to the exterior, as in 


AS! 



SPIMM COID 


SPINAL CUi¥AIUiE 


a hernia. TMs creates in the back a 
bulbous body filled with liquid 

Some cases of spina bifida aie ac¬ 
companied by what is called hydro¬ 
cephaly, derived from words mean¬ 
ing water and head. In this condition 
the fluid which is normally required 
within the membrane containing the 
brain increases inordinately in quan¬ 
tity and the skull bones expand to 
compensate. The size of the head be¬ 
comes grossly disproportionate to 
that of the body. 

Immediate medical attention 
should be given to every such case. 
Exposure of any part of the nervous 
system, as occurs in spina bifida, is 
extremely serious. Surgical repair 
will benefit at least half the children 
affected by the condition but must be 
undertaken as early as possible to 
obtain the greatest benefit. The elimi¬ 
nation of the bulge in the back often 
will accomplish much for the patient. 

If the condition is left unattended, 
the distortion of the spina! nerves 
and the strain to which they are sub¬ 
jected win disturb their function. 
When the abnormality occurs in the 
lower spine, the defect may cause 
paralysis of the legs and loss of nor¬ 
mal control over bladder and bowel 
action. If the nerve supply of the 
skin is inadequate, ulcers may de¬ 
velop. 

SPINAL COMB, the relatively large 
branch of nervous tissue that ex¬ 
tends from the brain down through 
the vertebrae. The brain and the 
spinal cord together constitute the 
central nervous system. 

The spinal cord is the medium 


for conimunication between the 
brain and many other parts of the 
body, and also effects numerous re¬ 
flex actions. Some of these are: re¬ 
flexes controlling many essential mus¬ 
cular movements, such as those jerk¬ 
ing the body away from sources of 
pain; reflexes partly controlling the 
bowel and urinary bladder, and 
movements in the digestive and cir¬ 
culatory systems and other oigans. 
The spinal cord transmits sensations 
of touch to the brain. 

The cord is about eighteen inches 
long and approximately the thickness 
of the little finger. Branching from it 
to the left and right, inlo the body 
itself, are thirty-one pairs of nerves. 
The vertebral column, or backbone, 
is much longer than the eighteen 
inches of the spinal cord. Conse¬ 
quently many of the projecting 
branches which serve lower parts of 
the body, and so leave the vertebral 
column lower, must extend through 
the rest of the column down to the 
point where they branch out of it. 

The spinal cord may be disordered 
in a number of w^ays. In myelitis, 
such as poliomyelitis, it is inflamed. 
Sclerosis, in which tissue associated 
with nerves hardens and damages 
them, may affect the spinal cord. 
Meningitis is inflammation of the 
membranes which encase both the 
brain and the spinal cord. The cord 
may be affected by concussion, in¬ 
ducing temporary paralysis, or it may 
be directly injured, as when the 
vertebral column itself breaks. 

SPINAL CUmVATOME, The spine 
is one of the most fundamental struc- 


682 



SPIMAL CUiVAIOEE 


SriMAL CUiVATUiE 


tural elements of the body and forms 
a basis around which other essential 
parts are arranged* Seen from the 
side, the spine has a modified S 
shape, giving it a springiness and 
elasticity that protect the delicate or¬ 
gans in the head and elsewhere from 
constant bumps and shocks. Seen 
from the front, it is a straight line. 
When this line loses its straightness 
and becomes a looplike curve, either 
to the right or to the left, the result¬ 
ing condition is scoliosis, or curva¬ 
ture of the spine. 

This curvature frequently is a 
symptom or a sequel of another dis¬ 
order rather than a disorder itself. 
Usually the backbone is extraordi¬ 
narily protected by the system of 
muscles and ligaments that combine 
with the spine to give the body its 
normal erectness. However, an inade¬ 
quacy may occur in these muscles 
which permits the spine to curve 
toward either side. One or more 
bones, rather than the muscles, may 
suffer breakdown, and thus throw 
other bones and tissues out of place. 

Scoliosis may occur from habitual 
bad posture. At first, only the posi¬ 
tions of the parts are abnormal and 
the tissues remain unaffected. Later, 
however, if the fault is not corrected, 
tissue changes do occur and the 
curvature wil become more or less 
permanent. 

Correct posture is especially essen¬ 
tial for children, and parents should 
keep careful watch to insure the 
child’s correct posture and eliminate 
any postural defects promptly to 
avoid any permanent deformity. Of¬ 
ten special exercises aid in develop¬ 


ing muscular strength, which may 
be lacking, to hold the spine in its 
natural erect position. 

The structural significance of the 
spine makes almost inevitable the 
displacement of other parts of the 
body when spinal deformity occurs. 
The lung of the side opposite the 



Spisioi Corvatore—Curvafure of the spinal 
column of unknown causation. Curvatures 
may result from faulty development of the 
spine or from diseases of the spina! column. 

curvature may become overcom¬ 
pressed; one or more nerves may 
suffer undue pressure. Frequently the 
lower rib or ribs will be thrown down 
against the thigh with no apparent 
spinal displacement. 

Such disorders should be examined 
by the doctor to determine whether 
or not the displacement observed is 
originating with a curvature in the 
spine which has hitherto escaped 
notice and diagnosis. The patient is 
observed standing in his habitual re¬ 
laxed position and then attempting to 
straighten his back as fully as pos¬ 
sible. The doctor may check the form 
of the spine against a straight vertical 
standard such as a plumb line. 

Orthopedists, who specialize in 

683 



SPINAL FlACTOtE 


SPINE 


correcting deformitieSjs can correct 
bad posture and support weak bodily 
structures with external mechaiiical 
means sucli as braces and casts. Or¬ 
dinarily, however, this is a last resort 
and emphasis is first placed on train¬ 
ing by exercises. 

SPINAL FMACTURE, any break of 
the bones of the spine. It is a serious 
injury since the spine is the structural 
foundation for most of the body and 
is the intermediary for communica¬ 
tion between the brain and the body. 
Before the advent of x-ray, the only 
positive sign that a back was broken 
was usually paralysis in one or more 
parts of the body. X-ray enables a 
much more thorough and certain 
diagnosis. Treatment of such frac¬ 
tures has also improved. 

Serious injury to the spine re¬ 
sults from a violent shock or blow. 
Since the spine is well protected by 
its structure and suriounding tissues, 
it must be struck or strained with un¬ 
usual force to break. Spinal injury 
can occur in automobile accidents, 
falls, in excessive efforts to move or 
lift a heavy load, or from a sudden 
violent jerk. The most severe breaks 
in the back occur in the region of 
the neck, where there are a greater 
number of nerves affecting other 
parts of the body than at a lower 
point of the back. The most serious 
consequences come from a fracture 
which invades or tears the spinal cord 
or causes a hemorrhage into it. Oc- 
casionaEy the cord may be injured 
as seriously as from a break when 
two or more vertebrae, the bones 
which make up the spine, are forced 


apart without actual fracture to the 

bones themselves. 

Spinal fracture, or any injiiry to 
the spinal cord or back or spine that 
seems to involve the nervous system, 
requires the immediate attention of a 
neurologist. X-ray study of all bones 
involved is esseetlaL 

Restoring the bones affected to 
their normal position is a primary 
expedient, usually done by a surgeon 
or orthopedist, a specialist in correc¬ 
tion of deformities of the back and 
limbs. Supports to hold the bones in 
place while they are healing will then 
be applied. In some instances when 
nerves associated with the excretory 
functions have been damaged, the pa¬ 
tient will need assistance with Madder 
and bowel action. 

When there is any possibility that 
a person has a broken back, the per¬ 
son should be moved as little as 
possible and a doctor called immedi¬ 
ately. Under the supervision of the 
doctor, the injured person will be 
placed, with a minimum of move¬ 
ment, onto a board for transport to 
the hospital. If the neck is broken, 
it is essential that the head be kept 
motionless. Deadening of sensation 
in parts of the body below the point 
of injury and loss of bowel and blad¬ 
der control are signs of serious dam¬ 
age. Serious spinal injury will proba¬ 
bly produce shock and the victim 
must be kept warm and, if it can be 
done without moving him, the head 
placed lower than the rest of the 
body. 

SPINEi the column of smail bones, 


684 



SPLEEN 


SPLEEN 


called vertebrae^ and associated tis¬ 
sues whicli niaintains the body in its 
erect posture^ The spine or backbone 
is a kind of natural spring, elastic in 
character and shaped like an S, which 
prevents the body from suffering the 
incessant shocks it would get if the 
spine were a single solid bone. Be¬ 
tween the vertebrae are cartilaginous 
discs, which have further shock-ab¬ 
sorbing action and which permit 
turning and twisting motion without 
friction among the vertebrae. 

The spine also carries the spinal 
cord and its extensions, which pro¬ 
vide not only intercommunication be¬ 
tween the brain and much of the 
body but regulate many reflex func¬ 
tions. 

The spine, made up of such heavy 
bones and so well protected by as¬ 
sociated muscles, is one of the most 
secure parts of the body. See also 
bacicache; chiropractic; slipped 
disc; spinal cord. 

SPLEEN^ a large, ductless, gland- 
like organ which lies in the upper 
left part of the abdomen, Just below 
the diaphragm and toward the rear 
of the body. 

Although the functions of the 
spleen are known to have significant 
relationships to the character and 
circulation of the blood, they are not 
fully understood. One unanswered 
problem concerns the dissolution and 
disposal of red cells of the blood 
which have exhausted their useful¬ 
ness, and another surrounds the pro¬ 
duction of new blood cells. Since 
such cells are intimately concerned 


in combatting infection, the spleen 
is further implicated in the control 

of disease. 

At times the spleen contracts, dis¬ 
charging a quantity of blood into 
the general circulation. Therefore, 
when an animal or human being ex¬ 
ercises intensively, the spleen is be¬ 
lieved to maintain the proper volume 
of blood circulating in the blood 
vessels. 

Animal experiments have pro¬ 
vided some interesting information 
regarding the spleen. The organ it¬ 
self evidently does not experience 
pain. Thus, by operation, a celluloid 
window can be inserted in an ani¬ 
mal’s abdominal wail and the be¬ 
havior of the spleen can be watched 
directly. The spleen can also be trans¬ 
planted to a location outside the ab¬ 
domen. When this is done, skin rap¬ 
idly grows over the spleen, and its- 
expansion and contraction can be 
observed directly. Dr, Joseph Bar- 
croft, well-known physiologist and 
investigator, has done valuable work 
in this field. 

An ancient idea, that the spleen 
is related to emotions, is expressed 
in the phrase, ^Venting your spleen/’ 
Barcroffs experiments on a dog 
tend to Justify this. A dog which 
was a confirmed cat chaser was 
trained to lie motionless on a table. 
Then the doctor would put before 
the dog’s nose, alternately, first a 
duster which had not touched a cat, 
then a duster which had been in a 
basket with a cat. Although the dog 
continued to lie motionless when it 
smelled the second duster, its spleen 
could be observed to contract, Smell- 


655 



SPLENIC DISEASE 


SPLENIC DISEASE 


mg the other duster left the dog’s 
splecE unaffected* 

Other animal experiments have re¬ 
vealed the contraction and discharge 
of Mood under the influence of ex¬ 
ercise, When the exertion is intensive 
enough, the kidney may become so 
depleted of blood that it suffers ac¬ 
tual damage. Evidently, then, the 
activity of the spleen in maintaining 
evenness of blood circulation helps 
to protect other organs which might 
be adversely affected without this 
supplement. 

Enlargement of the spleen is a dis¬ 
order of variable sources. Sometimes 
enlargement is due to splenic de¬ 
structive activity against wom-out 
blood cells and disease-creating or¬ 
ganisms which are retained within 
the spleen. Sometimes a fatty ma¬ 
terial enlarges the spleen. Enlarge¬ 
ment of the spleen appears in several 
major infectious diseases, among 
them malaria. Among primitive peo¬ 
ple of tropical areas, where malaria 
and consequently enlarged spleen are 
practically universal, a favorite strat¬ 
agem of hand-to-hand combat is to 
club the opponent about the spleen 
in an effort to rupture it, which can 
be fatal. 

Other conditions which tend to 
chronic splenic enlargement are 
Hodgkin’s disease, splenic anemia, 
pernicious anemia, leukemia, and 
hydatid and amyloid diseases. Fur¬ 
thermore, acute enlargement may ac¬ 
company enteric fever, anthrax, 
pyemia, septicemia, and other in¬ 
fections. 

Rupture may occur either because 


of external injury, as in an automo¬ 
bile accident, or spontaneously in 
connection with a massive enlarge¬ 
ment, Hemorrhage Is then intense, 
because the extensive blood supply 
which normally passes through or is 
bound in the spleen pours into the 
abdomen. If delay is not protracted, 
the condition can be treated surgi¬ 
cally. 

Splenic enlargement may accom¬ 
pany leukemia or a condition known 
as Banff’s disease, in which severe 
anemia occurs. 

An enlarged spleen is not always 
explicable, and if an adequate cause 
is not ascertained the organ must be 
removed. In such cases a lymphoma 
or tumor of lymphoid tissue may be 
responsible. In certain specific dis¬ 
eases, such as purpura hemorrhagica 
or thrombocytopenia, a clotting dis¬ 
order of the blood, removal of the 
spleen is considered beneficial. In 
the case of Bantfs disease, sple¬ 
nectomy is not generally recom¬ 
mended, The spleen is not essential 
to life—as is, for example, the liver 
—and its removal rarely produces ad¬ 
verse effects, 

SPLENIC DISEASE. Primary dis¬ 
orders of the spleen are so rare that 
the spleen has been considered an 
anticancerous organ, although sec¬ 
ondary cancer of the spleen does 
occur. However, like other tissues of 
the body the spleen is liable to in¬ 
juries from falls, wounds, and acci¬ 
dents. In some disorders the spleen 
fills the entire left side of the ab¬ 
domen and weighs many pounds* 
Disturbance of circulation of the 


686 



SPONDYLOLISTHESIS 


SPRAINS 


blood in the spleen is characterized 
by acute abdominal pain and a 
sudden increase in the size of the 
organ. 

Among unusual conditions affect¬ 
ing the spleen are the appearance of 
accessory spleens scattered through 
the abdomen; and floating or wan¬ 
dering spleen, in which the tissues 
which hold it in place become re¬ 
laxed and the organ moves from posi¬ 
tion, a condition far more frequent in 
women than men« 

Often the spleen is enlarged in 
malaria, leukemia and other blood 
disease, and can be a symptom of 
many generalized diseases. In Band’s 
syndrome, extreme enlargement of 
the spleen is associated with severe 
anemia. 

Sometimes surgical removal of the 
spleen is considered helpful—for in¬ 
stance, in severe cases of purpura 
hemorrhagica or thrombocytopenia, 
a condition in which the blood does 
not clot easily- The spleen may also 
be removed when tumors are present. 

Steroid hormones, ACTH, and 
cortisone are valuable in splenic dis¬ 
ease to lessen the destruction of red 
blood cells. ACTH and cortisone may 
be employed before an operation for 
removal of the spleen, often in con¬ 
nection with transfusions of whole 
fresh blood. See also spleen. 

SPONDYLOLISTHESIS, or slipped 
vertebra, a condition in which an 
exaggerated lumbar curve is formed 
when the fifth vertebra is so affected 
as to slip forward toward the front 
of the body. This abnormality is 
caused by defective growth of bone 


in the neural arch. Because support 
is lacking, the condition causes back¬ 
ache, which disappears when the per¬ 
son rests. The pain reappears on ex¬ 
ertion and is felt down the thigh and 
leg. 

SPOROTRICHOSIS, an infection of 
the skin and mucous membranes, 
caused by a fungus, the Sporotri- 
chum schenckii, which grows on 
plants and brush. Persons exposed 
to vegetation, such as gardeners or 
farmers, are most apt to become in¬ 
fected, usually by acquiring the fun¬ 
gus on the skin or a break in the 
skin. Sporotrichosis has also been 
found in horses, dogs, and cats. 

About twenty days to three 
months after contact with the fungus, 
a hard rubbery growth appears at 
the site of injury. The growth 
hardens, becomes inflamed, and 
gradually breaks through the skin, 
discharging a small amount of thin 
pus. The surrounding skin becomes 
discolored and finally turns black. 
The infection may spread to other 
skin areas, but rarely affects any in¬ 
ternal organs. 

Potassium iodide has been used 
successfully to treat sporotrichosis 
and is often continued for at least a 
month after apparent recovery as a 
safety measure. Abscesses which are 
slow iu healing may be drained to 
hasten recovery and then treated with 
the iodide. 

SPRAINS, injuries in the area of a 
joint, in which a sudden movement 
or a fall will stretch or overstrain 
connective tissue fibers belonging to 


687 



SFiUE 


SPiUE 


the ligaments^ muscleSj, or tendons 
so that they are tom or ruptured. 
Fluid or blood then gets into the 
joint. Sometimes a sprain is so se¬ 
vere that a bone is broken. For this 
reason every severe sprain should be 
x-rayed. The opening of the foot¬ 
ball season and the onset of winter 
produce a sudden increase in the 
number of sprainss particularly of 
the ankle. 

It is advisable to treat the injury 
as soon as possible. A firm bandage 
should be applied evenly and 
smoothly over the joint in order to 
limit internal bleeding. If materials 
are avadablCj, the sprain may be 
treated by putting a layer of cotton 
wool about an inch thick over the 
joint, and for an inch or two beyond 
it on either side, and bandaging as 
firmly as possible without causing 
discomfort. 

First-aid measures are helpful, but 
most sprains require medical atten¬ 
tion. Ordinarily a simple sprain is 
treated by rest, elevation of the leg 
and ankle, and the application of an 
ice bag. The doctor will immobilize 
the joint by strapping or he may 
use adhesive materials or even apply 
a plaster cast. Current treatment, 
however, recommends movement of 
the joint as soon as possible. In order 
to control accompanying pain, the 
physician may inject an anesthetic 
substance into the injured area, thus 
permitting the patient to use the foot 
or hand. 

Movement is difficult in a joint 
which has been fixed in one position 
for a long time, particularly if in¬ 
flammation and swelUng are pro¬ 


nounced. In such cases oaovemeDi is 
not attempted immediately, bat 
gradually. The bandage may be re¬ 
moved for a short time, and the 
joint gently massaged to aid soften¬ 
ing of the tissues and relaxation of 
the stiffness. Heat should not be ap¬ 
plied to a sprained ankle until the 
danger of congestion and hemorrhage 
has been controlled. The value of 
heat is greatest in the final stages, 
when repair has begun, in order to 
encourage circulation and absorp¬ 
tion of excess fluid. See also joints 

AND JOINT DISORDERS. 

SPMUEj a feverless chronic disease. 
Sprue comes from the Dutch word 
that describes an inflammation of 
the mouth. The disease, known for 
more than two thousand years, is 
generally considered to be a tropical 
ailment, although it will occur in 
persons who do not live in the trop¬ 
ics. Both tropical and noetropical 
sprue are probably nutritional defi¬ 
ciency disorders of the small intes¬ 
tine, marked by impaired absorption 
of food elements, particularly fats. 
However, the exact cause is un¬ 
known. 

Symptoms of sprue arc diarrhea, 
cramps, and distended stomach due 
to gas. The material from the bowels 
is pale, greasy, unformed and foul, 
and occasionally watery. The person 
with sprue becomes emaciated, mus¬ 
cles and fat waste away, and, in ad¬ 
vanced cases, recovery is difficult. 
Clubbed fingers and spotted skin may 
develop. When the person also suffers 
from a vitamin B complex deficiency, 
fissures develop at the comers of the 


688 



SQUINT 


STANFOiD-BlNET TEST 


mouth and the tongue is smooth and 
fiery red. 

In the past, many different kinds of 
diets were tried in treating sprae. 
Currently liver preparations and folic 
acid have produced favorable results. 
In sprue, treatment also involves a 
careful control of the diet, which 
should be moderately bland, low in 
fat, and high in proteins. Calcium in¬ 
take can be increased with skim 
milk and calcium lactate tablets, and 
ripe bananas, vitamin B 12 , and iron 
supplements have been found bene¬ 
ficial, Occasionally antibiotics and 
cortisone have been temporarily suc¬ 
cessful, but their prolonged use pre¬ 
sents certain problems. Sometimes 
small and repeated blood trans¬ 
fusions have been helpful, even life¬ 
saving, in critical cases of sprae. 

SQUINT, or strabismus, failure to 
focus both eyes on the same point. 
In the most common form, one eye 
looks toward the object while the 
other is turned from it. 

There are many kinds of squints, 
caused by a large number of dis¬ 
orders and diseases in the eye, the 
muscles that move it, the nerves sup¬ 
plying them, and the brain which 
controls and coordinates the nerve 
impulses. 

An eye specialist or ophthalmolo¬ 
gist can determine the exact type of 
squint a person has and then pre¬ 
scribe treatment. Frequently a squint 
may be cured by wearing special 
glasses. Sometimes the squinting eye 
must be trained and special exercises 
with certain instruments are pre¬ 
scribed. In some cases surgery on the 


muscles of the eyeball may be ad¬ 
visable. 

Treatment is generaly effective, 
but requires the cooperation of the 
patient. When a child has a squint, 
sympathetic attitudes on the part of 
his family and persons around him 
can be of great help. 

STAMMEKJNG« See stuttering 

AND STAMMERING. 

STANFORB-BIHET TEST. The 
Stanford-Binet or Intelligence 

Quotient test is a revision of the 
Binet-Simon tests which were origi¬ 
nally conducted in France by two 
French psychologists, Binet and 
Simon, who had been commissioned 
by the French government to study 
the conditions of mentally defective 
persons. They did extensive research 
to determine what the normal child 
should be expected to do at any 
particular age. 

No test has yet been developed 
which can conclusively measure 
someone’s intelligence, but many dif¬ 
ferent methods have been tried, with 
varying degrees of success. The Stan¬ 
ford revision of the Binet-Simon test 
is one of the most widely used at 
present. The a numerical 

rating, is determined by dividing the 
chronological age of the cMld tested 
into the age level the child achieves 
on the test and multiplying the re¬ 
sult by 100. For example, a ten-year- 
old child who has the capacity of a 
twelve-year-old child, according to 
the standard of achievement for each 
age group, has an I.Q. rating of 120. 
The average child is therefore rated 
at 100, Only one quality is tested, the 


689 



STERILITY 

reasoning iiiteEigeiice« According to 
this scale^ a person scoring below 70 
is a moron; below 50^ an imbecile; 
and below 20^ an idiot Out of a total 
of 500,000 mentally deficient per¬ 
sons in the United States, 30,000 are 
classified as idiots, 100,000 as im¬ 
beciles, and the rest as moronsa 

STERILITY^ the incapacity to pro¬ 
duce children, is a complex phe¬ 
nomenon involving a variety of fac- 
torSo Chief responsibility may be 
borne by the woman, the man, or 
both. Even when one or the other is 
specifically accountable, sterility may 
apply only to a given set of circum¬ 
stances; in another situation the same 
person might not be sterile. Because 
of its variability, sterility may prop¬ 
erly be regarded as characteristic of 
a particular union of two persons, 
rather than of either the man or the 
woman separately^ Scientists have 
determined that circumstances per¬ 
taining to the marriage relationship 
may cause sterility. 

Some marriages are deliberately 
childless, the husband and wife hav¬ 
ing decided to take measures to as¬ 
sure this. Other marriages, childless 
for other reasons, constitute 10 per 
cent of al marriages in the United 
States and Great Britain, according 
to investigators. 

In the past, a childless marriage 
was often assumed to be solely the 
responsibility of the wife. However, 
medical statistics indicate that men 
are responsible for 30 to 40 per cent 
of all instances of childlessness. Diag¬ 
nosis of the condition and endeavors 
to correct it demand first an examina- 


SIERIOTY 

tion of the husband. If the resiilts 
indicate thac he is responsible, the 
genera! physical condition of the 
wife is determined. A frequent cause 
of sterility in men is some disorder 
associated with the male germ ceil, 
the sperm, one of which must ferti- 
lize an ovum, or female egg cell, be¬ 
fore conception occurs. These male 
ceils are produced in the testes, the 
two male sex glands, and stored in 
the seminal vesicles, higher in the 
body. 

Such disorders may involve vari¬ 
ous organs or tissues. The glands 
may not produce sperm cells even 
though otherwise the man appears to 
be sexually normal. The sperm cells 
produced may be weak or mal¬ 
formed, so that they cannot function 
properly and carry the fertilization 
process to the final stage. Further¬ 
more, there may be msufficient num¬ 
bers of them; although only one 
sperm can fertilize a given, egg cell, 
a normal male provides three to four 
million of them on each ejaculation. 
Any of these conditions may be re¬ 
sponsible for the woman's failure to 
conceive, and the doctor has means 
for testing to find out whether or not 
such a condition is present. 

Conditions in the woman which 
prevent conception are even more 
varied than in the man. Among the 
simplest are Mection, inflameiation, 
or injury of the parts of the body ,in¬ 
volved. Sometimes the cause is block¬ 
age of a passage through which the 
sperm cells should travel. Occasion¬ 
ally congenital deformities of the 
sexual organs may cause such occlu¬ 
sion or otherwise render conception 


690 



STOMACH 


impossible^ In a few instances the 
uterus may be undeveloped or miss¬ 
ing entirely, 

A frequent cause of sterility in 
women is some irregularity in the 
system of glands of internal secre¬ 
tion, the endocrine glands, or of their 
products, the hormones. The sex 
glands axe a significant part of the 
whole glandular network, and a mis¬ 
hap in the latter can affect the fe¬ 
male sexual cycle at one of several 
points, making conception difficult 
or impossible. 

Other conditions which can induce 
sterility include faulty diet, a sub¬ 
ject not yet thoroughly understood, 
and emotional or mental disturbances 
which can react upon physical fac¬ 
tors. 

That a woman has not attempted 
to prevent conception and still has 
not conceived does not necessarily 
mean that pregnancy is impossible for 
her. The condition may continue for 
years and then terminate in a normal 
pregnancy and delivery. 

Complete physical examination of 
both husband and wife by a doctor 
is essential for the couple who seem 
sterile and wish to correct it. Such 
an examination will include studies of 
sperm cells of the husband and ex¬ 
amination of the wife’s sexual organs 
to determine their condition and 
whether or not the necessary tubes 
are open and functioning properly. 
A complete record of the sex experi¬ 
ences of both husband and wife is 
also imperative. The cause or causes 
that the physician finds operative will 
determine the recomniendations. Of¬ 
ten a previously sterile couple can 


achieve conception by careful use of 
knowledge of the alternating periods 
of fertility and infertility in the fe¬ 
male, regulated by the menstrual cy¬ 
cle. When a disease has closed one or 
both of the Fallopian tabes within 
the woman, attempts to free them by 
surgery or forcing a passage of air 
through them are only rarely suc¬ 
cessful. 

STOMACHg, the portion of the ali¬ 
mentary tract, the digestive tube, 
which extends from the lower end 
of the esophagus or gullet, the canal 
extending from the pharynx to the 
stomach, to the beginning of the 
duodenum or &st part of the small 
intestine. The normal stomach is 
J-shaped with a bulge above and to 
the left of the junction with the 
esophagus. The shape varies accord¬ 
ing to its fullness or emptiness and 
the position of the person. 

The stomach narrows to join the 
small intestine, forming the pyloric 
canal which has a thick muscular 
valve called the pyloric sphincter. 
Three muscular coats in the wall of 
the stomach are covered inside by 
a layer of mucus and a submucous 
lining containing blood vessels, 
lymphatics, and nerves. The internal 
surface of the stomach contains the 
minute gastric glands which manu¬ 
facture hydrochloric acid and certain 
ferments which digest food into 
simpler substances. The muscular 
walls grind and mix the food with 
the gastric Juices. About every 
twenty seconds, a wave of contrac¬ 
tion passes along the stomach from 
the upper part to the pylorus. During 


691 



STOMACH ACHE 


STiEPIOMYCIN 


digestions the coEtractlons also cause 
partially digested food to pass into 
the duodeniira in the form of chyme, 
a thick fluid* 

Various congenital deformities may 
affect the stomach, such as enlarge- 
meiit of the muscle of the pyloric 
valve* Gastroptosis or dropped stom¬ 
ach may occur later in life. Surgery 
is generally successful in correcting 
congenital abnormalities when they 
are known. 

Inflammation of the lining of the 
stomach is a common disorder^ oc¬ 
curring in various forms and at any 
time throughout life. Peptic ulcers 
are another common stomach dis¬ 
order, resulting from action of the 
gastric juices on the stomach wall. 
An increase in the amount or con¬ 
centration of gastric juice causes 
acidity. 

Cancer of the stomach is responsi¬ 
ble for a great number of deaths 
each year in the United States. It 
usually occurs in late middle age and 
more often in men than women, 
men past forty-five being the most 
frequent victims. Cancer of the stom¬ 
ach is of several types, including ul¬ 
cerating cancer, tumor growing in 
the stomach cavity, and a diffuse 
thickening of the stomach wall. Loss 
of weight, appetite, and general nor¬ 
mal health are symptoms of stomach 
cancer, but unfortunately the cancer 
is often too far advanced before it 
is detected to be effectively treated 
and may have spread to regional 
lymph nodes and other organs. Be¬ 
cause of the danger of stomach can¬ 
cer, any form of stomach **upsef’ 
after middle age should receive im¬ 


mediate medical attention. If the 
cancer is discovered soon enough, an 
operation to remove the cancer with 
a portion or even ail of the stomach 
can be successful in curing the con¬ 
dition, and so it is imperative that it 
be diagnosed at the earliest possible 
time. Cancer of the stomach is too 
often a hopelessly fatal disease be¬ 
cause of a late diagnosis. See also 
digestion; fistula; food poison¬ 
ing; gastritis; indigestion; peptic 

ULCER. 

STOMACH ACHE. See abdominal 

PAIN. 

STOMACH ULCER. peptic 

ULCER. 

STREPTOCOCCUS, a genus of bac¬ 
teria which grows in chains, resem¬ 
bling tiny strings of beads when 
viewed under the microscope. Strep¬ 
tococcus germs are present in infec¬ 
tions such as erysipelas, scarlet 
fever, subacute bacterial endocardi¬ 
tis, puerperal fever, subacute sore 
throat, streptococcus throat, and cer¬ 
tain forms of enteritis and rheumatic 
fever. 

STREPTOMYCIN, an antibiotic 
drug obtained from the moldlike 
microscopic plant, Streptomyces 
griseus. It is similar to penicillin in 
its antibacterial action and method 
of manufacture, and has been found 
particularly effective against many 
disease-producing germs that peni¬ 
cillin also attacks. In addition it is a 
powerful agent against some diseases 
that are not affected by penicillin, 
such as tularemia, a severe infectious 


692 



STiESS 


STiESS 


disease acquired in handling infected 
rabbits* 

Streptomycin is also effective in 
treating certain types of Mood and 
urinary infections which are not 
helped by other drugs* Reports in¬ 
dicate that it may cure tuberculous 
meningitis^ and it has been success¬ 
fully used in diseases produced by 
the conunon colon bacillus* Pneu¬ 
monia;, streptococcus infections, 
staphylococcal pneumonia, and staph¬ 
ylococcal meningitis are among the 
many diseases in which streptomycin 
has been effectively used* 

Streptomycin is taken orally or in¬ 
jected directly into the blood stream, 
as the condition dictates. In cases of 
meningitis, it is injected into the 
spinal fluid. See also antibiotics. 

STRESS, a state of tension or pres¬ 
sure which may be physical, such as 
results from accident or injury; or 
emotional, such as stress caused by 
an impending threat or other diffi¬ 
cult situation. It is in the latter, the 
psychological sense that the word 
stress is generally used in medicine 
today. 

People have been aware that 
emotions affect the body long be¬ 
fore science proved it experimental¬ 
ly. Expressions such as “became 
paralyzed with fear,’’ “sick with dis¬ 
gust,” “trembling with anger,” are 
commonly heard in everyday life. 
Emotions are, however, more far- 
reaching than such visible evidence 
indicates. Any emotion, mild or 
severe, registers in every cell and 
tissue of the body. With a strong 
emotion, such as fear, the entire 


body tone changes; blood pressure 
rises, heart and breathing are fast¬ 
er, the adrenal glands become more 
active, and changes in the gastro¬ 
intestinal tract and shifting of blood 
supply take place. 

The stress may be situational, 
that is, it may be caused by a speci¬ 
fic difficult situation or danger; or 
the stress may be present without 
an actual threat but because of 
underlying emotional problems. 
Moreover, the physiological changes 
of a stress situation may sometimes 
be brought about by merely dis¬ 
cussing the threat, as illustrated, 
for example, by a girl who repressed 
feelings of hostility toward her 
family but brought them into the 
open in the doctor’s office. 

Stress, it is thus evident, can 
build up. If the stress resulting from 
underlying emotional problems con¬ 
tinues for a long time, various phys¬ 
ical symptoms may be produced. 
The patient may develop high blood 
pressure, stomach ulcers, diarrhea, 
constipation or other conditions. 
Some authorities estimate that at 
least one half of general medical 
practice is for such stress-induced 
diseases. 

These diseases are considered by 
some to be protective measures 
taken by the individual against 
threats or symbols of danger which 
the early experience of the individu¬ 
al unconsciously interprets as actual 
fearful dangers. Why some people 
react to life stresses with peptic 
ulcer, others with high blood pres¬ 
sure or diarrhea or headache or no 


693 



STROKE 


STUTTERING AND STAMMERING 


disease at ail, depends on many 
factors, on which there is no general 
agreement. Mosi theories, however, 
take into account early infantile and 
childhood experiences, or a total life 
experience together with physiologi¬ 
cal factors. 

There are people in whom life 
stresses build up to a degree in 
which the ‘'mental load*’ is too 
burdensome. In such cases what is 
commonly called a nervous break¬ 
down may result, the duration and 
severity of which depend also on a 
complex of factors. Relatively minor 
stresses may find expression in a 
variety of ways. A common outlet 
for repressed hostility, for example, 
may be seen in the individual who 
drives recklessly and violently, al¬ 
most obviously in pursuit of an acci¬ 
dent. 

Apart from the repressed and un¬ 
resolved mental conflicts of the in¬ 
dividual, social attitudes add their 
own stresses. These social attitudes 
vary with different cultures and 
they vary also in different times. 
However, basic in treating certain 
diseases, many believe, is the un¬ 
covering of hidden emotional con¬ 
flicts that find expression in those 
diseases and in personality disord¬ 
ers. The stresses of life, they feel, 
can be managed if the personality 
has not been impaired by early life 
experiences. See also anxiety; 
EMOTIONAL HEALTH; FEAR. 

STROKEs, a sudden and severe seiz¬ 
ure or fit of disease. The term is 
generaly used for apoplexy, and in 


connection with sunstroke and heat¬ 
stroke. See also kwvltxy; heat 

SICiCNESSo 

STUTTEMNG SfAMMEE- 

may be described as spasmodic 
speech defects, lesullieg io a sudden 
check in the flow of m^ordSj or a rapid 
repetition of a consoriaoi or con¬ 
sonants with which the person has 
difficulty. Usually the difficulty is 
with the sounds p, b, m, and w, 
which are sounds made by the lips. 
The stutterer or stammerer does not, 
however, alv/ays have difficulty with 
the same sounds. His emolioiiai state 
at the time of speaking may be a 
factor in how he speaks. 

Stuttering or stammering are al¬ 
most never due to any organic weak¬ 
ness, either in the organs used in 
speaking or in the nerves and nerve 
centers which control them. Physical 
factors may, however, sometimes 
aggravate it. The doctor will first 
make sure that inflammation of ade¬ 
noids, abnormal length of uvula, ab¬ 
normal size of the tongue, and im¬ 
proper development of the mouth arc 
not involved. 

Often children who stutter develop 
behavior changes; a fear of appeatriiig 
ridiculous produces a subsequent lack 
of confidence. Persons naturally left- 
handed but trained to use their right 
hand stammer more frequently than 
others, and males more often than 
females. Anyone acutely embarrassed 
or terrified is likely to stammer, until 
his emotion is under controL Stam¬ 
mering is usually an expression of 
self-consciousness, shyness, or fear. 
In an eager younpter, however, it 


694 



SUNBURN 


may be nothing mofe than failure to 
keep up with his rapid low of 
thought; words and thoughts are con¬ 
ceived faster than they can be ex¬ 
pressed. Stammerers almost always 
can sing and talk to themselves quite 
fluently. 

Because stuttering and stammering 
are primarily conditions which have 
emotional causes, treatment is di¬ 
rected toward the person’s mental 
conflicts. When the conffict is re¬ 
solved, the person will probably re¬ 
gain self-confidence and the speech 
defect disappears. The person with 
a speech defect may benefit from 
special speech correction classes. A 
class is often preferable to personal 
instruction since the person will be 
encouraged by the progress of others 
and the realization that he is not 
alone in his problem. His family and 
friends must be patient, tolerant, and 
confident; anger and impatience will 
only aggravate the situation. 

STY. See eye. 

SUFFOCATION. See asphyxia. 

SULFONAMIDE DRUGS, or 
“sulfa’’ drugs, are derived from or are 
compounds of sulfonamide, and their 
introduction into medicine marked a 
turning point in the treatment of 
disease. Among the sulfonamide 
drugs are sulfadiazine, sulfapyridine, 
Gantrisin, K 3 mex, and others. These 
drugs act effectively on diseases 
caused by staphylococcus, meningo¬ 
coccus, streptococcus, and organisms 
of the dysentery group. 

Before sulfa drugs, treatment of 
such diseases as lobar pneumonia and 


spinal meningitis depended on se¬ 
rums, which were only moderately 
successful. Management of infections 
of the middle ear was so ineffective 
that loss of hearing and mastoiditis 
often followed. Treatment of gonor¬ 
rhea depended on repeated and fre¬ 
quently unsuccessful urethral injec¬ 
tions. The use of sulfa drugs virtually 
revolutionized treatment of these and 
other conditions. 

The sulfonamides differ in degree 
of activity, rate of absorption or 
metabolic and toxic effects, and 
should only be taken under the 
supervision, and recommendation of 
a doctor. In some persons they cause 
undesirable side effects, such as rash, 
fever, and a lowering of the number 
of white cells in the blood. While 
these complications are infrequent, 
care must still be exercised in use of 
the drugs. 

Penicillin and other antibiotics 
have superseded sulfa drugs in many 
cases, or the sulfa drugs are used in 
combination with antibiotics as anti- 
infective systemic drugs to combat 
bacterial infection. 

SUNBURN, known medically as 
erythema solare, discoloration or in¬ 
flammation of the skin, developing 
from overexposure to the sun. It may 
be as simple as a slight reddening of 
the skin or severe enough to cause 
blistering, fever, and nausea. Prac¬ 
tically everyone has suffered at least 
a slight sunburn with red, dry, hot 
skin. Ointments, lotions, or creams 
help to relieve the discomfort, which 
results from exposure of the nerve 
endings. 


695 



SUNSTROKE 


SUiGEON 


More severe sunbuniSj involving 
blisters, dizziness, headache, fever, 
vomiting, and other symptoms of 
constitutional disturbance due to the 
secondary toxic effects of the burn, 
should be treated as if the bum had 
resulted from other causes, such as 
ire or hot water. A burn from the 
sun is a bum fully as much as any 
other, and the victim should consult 
a physician. 

Danger from sunhght is chiefly due 
to the effects of ultraviolet rays, the 
short heat rays. More ultraviolet light 
penetrates near the water than in- 
land, and a cool day with brilliant 
sunshine is more scorching than a 
hot but hazy day. The burning effect 
of bright sunlight reflected from 
snow is well known. 

The skin of an infant is much more 
delicate than that of adults and will 
burn and become inflamed more 
promptly. Special care should there¬ 
fore be taken to avoid overexposure 
of an infant to the sun. Blonde or 
red-haired persons with fair skin are 
particularly susceptible to burning, 
but everyone should acquire resist¬ 
ance to sunburn by gradual exposure, 
beginning with perhaps only five or 
ten minutes in the direct sun. 

SUNSTEOKE. heat sickness. 

SUPPUBATION refers to the for¬ 
mation of pus. 

SURGEON, a doctor who special¬ 
izes m operative techniques For¬ 
merly, a surgeon undertook any¬ 
thing that was to be done which in¬ 
volved the use of the knife on the 
human body. Now operations are so 

696 


technical and the issoci ltd cut of 
the patients so in\ol\td ind intri¬ 
cate that suigeiv h is hiokcp up into 
a gieat nunihei of spLc.liitic^ I iiese 
include suigcn of the huiiii and 
ncivoLis system, siiigcu of the hctiit 
and the associated b!cH>d \cssels 
surgery of the sioniach ind the in 
testines, suiuei\ of the lima and 
chest orthopedic sin ecu ’cnUal- 
unnarv suigcn u\ ncco!o-,ic if sui- 
ger\, plastic sumci\ and itlufuliia 
live suigery In nnn\ luge schoids 
and hospitals tod i\ there uc dm 
sions ioi each of these single il spe 
ciaities Moieovei tlie Vmencan 
Board of Surgeic which ccitifics a 
suigeon as to his qiiahtications, has 
recognized some of these spccialt\ 
branches iis sub-divisions of siiigeiy 
with special examining hoaids The 
tiainmg of the suigeon has become 
long and aiduous m the I nitcd 
States requumg not iuih i dcgice 
in medicine hut also genti a! intern¬ 
ship followed b\ a single i! icsi- 
dency and sometimes an assistiinl- 
ship of manv }cais before the sin- 
geon undeitakcs to piactice aiunc 
In the hospital oi clina the suigeon 
no longer functions meielv with the 
aid oi an anesthetist and a nuisc hut 
is now associated with a laige gioiip 
of persons known as a surgical team 
Such a team might inciude the siii- 
geon, the anesthetist, the siirgeoiiX 
assistant, the surgical nuisc and 
often associated personne! to take 
care of blood transfusion, the use 
oi various fluids and resuscitation. 
See aho surgery, surgi ry, his¬ 
tory OF, SURGERY Oi OIDtR PFO- 
PIE 



SURGERY 









' r - 


Heart S«frgery~(A) Phofogrophs taken 
during actual surgery on the heart. Stric¬ 
tures of the aortic and mitral valves of the 
heart are being widened, left side of the 
heart has been opened and the ribs ore 
held back to expose the heart. 


Aortic Vcsive-fB) The aortic vctive is to be 
dilated first. Surgeon i$ shown testing the 
aortic valvulotome which will be inserted 
into the ventricle. When the dilating mecha¬ 
nism is compressed the bars expand oof- 
wardiy, widening the volve. 






Mitral Vai¥e-~{E| The mitral vaive is being 
opened. The finger is introduced info the 
valve and the sides split tO' widen the 
opening. The technique is called "finger 

fracture."" 


■jj cedures are completed and the chest 

being closed. 






Pressure Readings—(G) The doctors are 
taking pressure readings by means of a 
manometer connected to a needle which is 
inserted into the left heart chambers. 


Coittpciritig Pressure Recidliigs-fH) The 
pressure readings are being compared with 
those taken before surgery. Reduced pres¬ 
sures would mean that the surgery had been 
successful in relieving, of least partially, the 
stenotic valves^ 




SURGEiY 


SURGERY, HISTORY OF 


SURGEEY, the art of treating in¬ 
juries or diseases by operative tech¬ 
niques. The surgeon has always been 
an integral part of medical science. 
Some of the earliest medical writ¬ 
ings known are devoted chiefly to 
records of surgical cases. Strangely, 
however, the great advances in sur¬ 
gery have been dependent on medi¬ 
cal discoveries in other fields. These 
advances include the discovery of 
anesthesia by Morton and Long in 
1847; the discovery of the principle 
of antisepsis, which prevented in¬ 
fection during surgery, and the 
wearing of rubber gloves, intro¬ 
duced by Halstead. The use of blood 
transfusion, the control of fluid in 
the body, the feeding of patients by 
a variety of techniques and the use 
of drugs for controlling various 
symptoms have also aided success 
in surgery. 

Less than fifty years have passed 
since the time when few surgeons 
dared to invade the interior of the 
body as a whole, let alone the brain. 
Today there is no portion of the 
human body that is not invaded suc¬ 
cessfully. Previously surgery was 
largely mutilating, involving the re¬ 
moval of diseased organs or tissues. 
The surgery of today is called phy¬ 
siological surgery and is aimed at 
restoring normal function of vari¬ 
ous organs and tissues when these 
functions have failed. Under these 
circumstances, the surgeon today 
does procedures which would have 
been called highly radical just ten 
years ago. Examples are removal of 
almost all of the organs of the pel¬ 


vis for the treatment i>f v:anccr, the 
removal of the esophagus or swal¬ 
lowing tube because of the picscncc 
of cancer, the conipletc removal of 
the stomach, the removal ol the 
breast with all of its associated 
lymph glands, the removal ol the 
colon because of chronic ulcerative 
colitis or the appearance o! pol\ps 
and divcrticuli which ma\ be related 
to cancer. This does not iiiciiide the 
operations that have been done on 
the heart or removal of the lung in 
whole or in part and the extensive 
operations on the brain and other 
portions of the nervous system. Sec 
also surcuon; soRcaRs, iiisiorx 
of; surgfry or oi di r pioph. 

SURGERY, HISTORY OIL 1 he 
rise of surgery depended upon the 
knowledge of such fundamental sci¬ 
ences as anatom), ph\ siolog), 
pathology and anesthesia. Just as 
the stethoscope is the sign of the 
physician, the scalpel or suigica! 
knife is the token of the surgeon. 
The first scalpel ever seen in an 
illustration appears in the lemple 
of Esculapiin on the Acropolis in 
Athens and dates back to 30(1 b.c. 
Scalpels continue to be modified in 
shape and form; the final important 
modifications were made with rela¬ 
tionship to ease of sterilization. 
Handles with ivory and boned wood 
and tortoise shell went out with the 
coming of Lister, 

Ligatures for tying off blood ves¬ 
sels and for stopping hemorrhage 
were known as far back as the time 
of Galen, in Rome around 150 a.d. 


702 



SUIGEIY OF OLDE^ PEOPLE 

Apparently the sim has been known 
to man since before the birth of 
history and is supposed to have been 
conceived from studying the teeth 
of fish and such animals as the saw¬ 
fish. Saws for surgery were modified 
contiiiuousiy until the time of the 
modern saw which is electrically 
operated. Trepanning and opening 
of the skull was employed by the 
ancient Incas of South America. 
The practice was freely engaged 
upon in the time of Hippocrates and 
the ancient Egyptians. 

Devices for dilating various open¬ 
ings of the body in order to permit 
the entrance of instruments and 
hands go back also to the ancients 
but the modern devices arc far 
superior both as to perfection, as 
to the fit and to illumination. The 
discovery of electric light and its 
adaptation to surgical and medical 
instruments may be considered 
among the greatest of medical dis¬ 
coveries and new^ devices are intro¬ 
duced every year for such proce¬ 
dures. 

Tapping for the release of fluid 
from the cavities of the body was 
performed by the ancient Greeks 
and Romans and the new devices 
which are known as trocars also arc 
continuously modified with the in¬ 
troduction in more recent times of 
air suction and the use of the x-ray 
for indicating the area where a tro¬ 
car is to be inserted. 

Even in the last ten years new dis¬ 
coveries were made in relationship 
to the operating table which began 
with a simple board and four legs 


SWIMMING POOLS 

and which now has reached the 
stage of tables that can be adjusted 
to any position, tables which pro¬ 
vide for the anesthetist and the 
nurses and for holding arms and 
legs and various portions of the 
body exactly as needed. There are 
tables which permit the head to be 
dropped backward for operations 
on the nose and throat and indeed 
special devices for brain surgery. 
See also surgeon; surgery; sur¬ 
gery OF OLDER PEOPLE. 

SURGERY OF OLDER PEOPLE^ 
An analysis of surgical operations 
done on older people have shown 
that, under modern conditions, sur¬ 
gery is performed on the aged with 
little risk; this is especially true 
when it is done as an elective opera¬ 
tion rather than as an emergency. 
Much emergency surgery on older 
people could be avoided if chronic 
conditions requiring surgery were 
cared for before emergencies de¬ 
veloped. Postponing an operation 
saps a patient’s strength and in¬ 
creases the risk of shock and other 
complications. See also surgeon; 
surgery; surgery, history of. 

SWEAT* SEE PERSPIRATION* 

SWIMMING POOLS* The chief dis¬ 
orders transmitted through swimming 
pools are mflammation of the eye, 
boils, ear infections, chronic inflam¬ 
mation of the nose and sinuses, sore 
throat, various skin infections, par¬ 
ticularly ringworm and athlete’s foot, 
and infections of the bowels, and 
dysentery. As a precaution, most 


703 



SYMPATHETIC NERVOUS SYSTEM SYMPATHETIC NERVOUS SYSTEM 


public swimming pools require that 
all persons take a shower and walk 
through a footbath before entering 
the pool. No one with any ailment or 
infection should ever swim in a poo! 
with other persons. 

To keep the water in the pool 
clean and safe, che m icals are usually 
added. Ultraviolet rays are sometimes 
used for this purpose. Filter systems 
help remove sediment and infectious 
materials and pools are usually 
drained regularly. 

Private pools should maintain the 
same strict sanitary conditions that 
most public pools do. Usually filters, 
chemicals, and purifiers are sold 
along with the pool, and in some 
places a special service will regularly 
clean and purify the pool. 

SYMPATHETIC NERVOUS SYS¬ 
TEM, or autonomic nervous system, 
supplies and exerts a regulatory ac¬ 
tivity to most of the involuntary 
organs of the body—glands, heart, 
blood vessels, for example—and in¬ 
voluntary muscles in the internal 
organs. 

The S5^tem consists of a network 
of nerves and a series of nerve cell 
collections called ganglia. Some gan¬ 
glia are connected to the spinal cord 
by fibers. Meshworks of fibers are 
sent out by the vertebral ganglia to 
the organs located in the abdomen 
and pelvis. Ganglia also arise within 
the brain and supply the tear and 
salivary glands and the pupils of the 
eye, and are connected with nerves 
that affect the ears. 

Impulses through sympathetic 
nerve fibers cause dilation of the 


pupil, sweating, quickening and 
augmentation of the heartbeat, stop¬ 
page of the flow of gastric juice, 
contraction of arteries, and many 
other body actions. All these func¬ 
tions are automatic or involuntary. 

In contrast, the action of fee 
parasympathetic nervous system, that 
division between the cranium and the 
sacrum, is somewhat antagonistic to 
the sympathetic action. Thus, it slows 
the heart and stimulates the flow of 
gastric juices. 

The blood supply to any part of 
the body can be increased by inter¬ 
ruption of the sympathetic nerves 
that pass to that part. In hypertension, 
sympathectomy—cutting off the sym¬ 
pathetic nerves by surgery—is some¬ 
times employed to increase the flow 
of blood into the abdominal area and 
lower limbs and thus decrease the 
blood pressure. Currently drugs are 
preferred to surgery to block the 
sympathetic nerves. Interruption or 
treatment of the sympathetic nervous 
system has occasionally been used in 
heart conditions such as angina 
pectoris, in cases of severe pain in¬ 
volving the urinary tract, to control 
serious disorders of the sweat glands, 
and to aid movement of the bowels. 

The sympathetic nervous system is 
responsible for the physical sensations 
that accompany emotion. For ex¬ 
ample, suppressed resentment may 
cause overactivity of the muscles and 
glands of the stomach, and actual 
pain can result. In some psychotic or 
neurotic conditions, the system is 
involved and changes can occur in 
affected organs. 


704 



SYNDROME 


SYPHILIS 


SYNBEOME5 a set of specific symp¬ 
toms which occur regularly la the 
same combinatiou and constitute a 
specific disease. Dozens of disorders 
are known as syndromes, a large 
number of them bearing the name of 
the first doctor to note the sjmdrome, 
connect it with the underlying disease 
condition, and call attention to it. 
Well-known syndromes are Cushing’s 
syndrome, indicating tumor in certain 
parts of the brain; Korsakoff’s syn¬ 
drome or psychosis, associated with 
chronic alcoholism; and Addisonian 
syndrome, a condition caused by in¬ 
sufficiency of the adrenal glands. 

SYNOVITIS, inflammation of the 
synovial membranes, those mem¬ 
branes which line the joints. The 
chief manifestation is an outpouring 
of fluid into the joint cavity. It may 
occur as a reaction to injury or as a 
result of infection somewhere else in 
the body. 

“Water on the knee” is a tj^ical 
instance of synovitis. A combination 
of rest and gentle pressure from 
bandaging will help to induce absorp¬ 
tion of the fluid. See also joints 

AND JOINT DISORDERS. 

SYPHILKl, a contagious venereal dis¬ 
ease which can infect any of the 
body tissues. It is characterized by a 
variety of lesions, of which the 
chancre (primary lesion), the mucous 
patch, and the gumma are the most 
distinctive. It is caused by a spiro¬ 
chete, Treponema pallidum. 

The origin of syphilis is not known, 
but it has been claimed that Colum¬ 
bus’s crew first introduced it into 
Europe after their return from the 


New World. A few of the crew 
members were with Charles VIII of 
France when he invaded Italy in 
1495, and a terrible epidemic of 
syphilis broke out there, rapidly 
spreading over all of Europe. Today 
S 3 ^hilis is world-wide and still one 
of the major scourges of ma nkin d. 
Figures released by the Venereal 
Disease Program of the U. S. Public 
Health Service in 1957 reveal that 
of 266,000 persons examined and 
found to have syphilis, 55 per cent 
were teen-aged and young adults. 

The vast majority of adult cases of 
syphilis are acquired through sexual 
contact. Treatment usually seems to 
render the infected person incapable 
of transmitting the disease, but there 
is some evidence that persons pre¬ 
sumably cured can still infect others. 

A few hours after exposure, the 
S 5 q)hilis spirochete penetrates the 
skin or mucous membrane and enters 
the blood stream and tissues. The 
“hard chancre,” the primary stage 
of the disease, does not appear until 
ten to ninety days later, three weeks 
being the average time. Usually the 
chancre is found on the genitals or 
in the mouth, but it may appear else¬ 
where and occasionally not at all. 
The fluid from the chancre is highly 
infectious. 

Even without treatment, chancres 
generally disappear in ten to forty 
days, and the secondary stage, small 
raised red areas on the skin or small 
mucous patches in the mouth or on 
the reproductive organs, begins two 
to six months later. Generally lymph 
nodes throughout the body become 
enlarged. These lesions of secondary 

705 



SYPHILIS 


SYPHILIS 


sj^hilis heal by themselves in three 
to twelve weeks, but may recur later. 

The third stage of syphilis develops 
almost immediately after the second¬ 
ary symptoms have disappeared, or, 
in some cases, may be delayed for 
years. Ulcer-like draining lesions ap¬ 
pear on the skin; hard nodules or 
gumma occur in the internal organs 
or tissue under the skin. The blood 
vessels and heart are often damaged 
and the lungs may be affected during 
this stage. 

Neurosyphilis or syphilis of the 
central nervous system can accom¬ 
pany either the second or third stage 
of syphilis, although more commonly 
the third. When the spinal cord is 
involved, loss of coordination of 
limbs may ensue. In general paresis, 
the brain is infected and mental 
faculties deteriorate and the limbs 
become paralyzed. 

Syphilis is the only venereal disease 
that may be acquired congenitally by 
the passing of the spirochete from 
the mother to the unborn child. 
Syphilitic infection may cause abor¬ 
tion or stillbirth. Infants who are 
bom with syphilis may soon die; or, 
if they survive, may later develop 
blindness, deafness, paralysis, deform¬ 
ities, or even mental disturbances. 
Because of these terrible conse¬ 
quences, every prospective mother 
should be examined for syphilis so 
that, if she does have it, treatment 
can begin immediately. Even if 
treatment is delayed until the fourth 
or fifth month of pregnancy, the child 
may still be bom healthy. If, how¬ 
ever, treatment has been inadequate 
or absent, the newborn chM should 


immediately be given penicillin. The 
amount given to children depends on 
the age the treatment begins; children 
over two years receive the same dose 

as adults. 

Usually the first symptom of syphi¬ 
lis is a sore at the point where the 
germ has entered the body. The 
doctor makes his diagnosis by study¬ 
ing the material from the sore under 
a microscope. In the Darkfield 
method, the germs appear light and 
the rest of the slide dark. He will also 
give the patient a Wassermann, Kahn, 
or one of the standard serological 
tests for syphilis. 

When the syphilis germ enters the 
body, it multiplies quickly and gradu¬ 
ally invades every organ and tissue, 
certain germs being limited to certain 
parts of the body, and syphilis can 
therefore imitate a wide variety of 
diseases. 

Current treatment of syphilis with 
penicillin and other antibiotics has 
largely replaced former methods of 
treatment. These drugs can halt the 
spread of the disease within a few 
days. Penicillin is used not only for 
early syphilis but to alleviate the 
symptoms of neurosyphilis and in 
congenital syphilis. Because of the 
notable success, it was at first thought 
that penicillin and the antibiotics 
might completely wipe out syphilis, 
but recent figures compiled by the 
Venereal Disease Program showed an 
increase in primary and secondary 
syphilis in eighteen states. This in¬ 
crease occurred among both sexes. 

A person who has syphilis should 
lead a healthy life, with proper diet 


706 



SYilNGE 


SYRINGE 


and adequate sleep» He should sleep 
alone and not have sexual intercourse 
until Ms physician is sure he is free 
of contagion* Intercourse will not 
only interfere with the cure of the 
disease^ but is likely to transmit the 
disease to the other person. In many 
states syphilis is a bar to marriage 
and a physician’s certificate or affi¬ 
davit is required from applicants stat¬ 
ing that they are free from venereal 
disease. Other states require only 
that the applicants be tested for 
syphilis, as a mutual warning. Need¬ 
less to say, anyone with syphilis 
should postpone marriage until free 
of contagion. The syphilitic person 
should be especially careful that 
others are not exposed to the disease 
from contact with Ms personal 
articles, such as towels, drinking 
glass, toothbrush, etc. Anything that 


touches the open sores should be 
disinfected or destroyed. 

It cannot be too strongly urged 
that anyone who suspects that he 
has S3q>hilis see a doctor immediately. 
Some people through false shame or 
modesty permit the disease to spread 
to a critical point before seeking 
medical aid. The fact that a person 
has once had S3^hilis should always 
be mentioned when he later sees a 
doctor or dentist for other reasons, 
since it may furnish a clue to treat¬ 
ment. See also chancee; paresis, 

SYRINGE^ an instrument used to 
inject fluid beneath the skin or into 
a cavity. It consists of a nozzle, 
barrel, and plunger or rubber bulb. 
There are various special types of 
syringe, the rectal syringe, and the 
urethral syringe. 


707 



TABESj a wasting or degeneration. 
Althougli there are many types of 
tabes, the word usually designates 
tabes dorsalis, also known as loco¬ 
motor ataxia. See also locomotor 

ATAXIA. 

TACHYPHAGIA, the habit of rapid 
eating. The tachyphage is one who 
gulps his meals without stopping to 
sit down, or eats so fast he does not 
relax or enjoy his food. 

The tachyphage does not improve 
Ms digestive apparatus by this mode 
of life. The state of his stomach is 
usually so troublesome that none of 
the normal pleasures of life, eating, 
drinking, or even the esthetic and 
intellectual joys, are ever his. 

Fortunate is the tachyphage who, 
discovering Ms folly early, can take 
the necessary corrective measures 
while he is still in relatively good 
health. These include regular hours 
for meals, the use of a proper menu, 
the exclusion of shop talk from the 
table and, above att, slow eating. 


TALIPES, any one ol a varietv of de¬ 
formities of the bunian foot, espe¬ 
cially those oi congenital cnigin, such 
as clubfoot. aiso a inn 

TAFE^'imm. Set worms. 

TATfOOINC, the piodiiction of 
permanent color in llie skin b’> im 
tioducing toreign substances, by 
pricking in coloring mtitier, or by 
making scats. lallCHMog, Pohnesiaii 
in origin, dates lion*! primitive times 
when sa\<a.ges piginciuei! their skin 
and tattooed the b(u!\, usually in 
connection with rcligfoiis woiship. 
Ritual tattooing is still practiced by 
native tribes in Africa and in other 
parts of the world. 

In tattooing, mineral and vegetable 
pigments are carried by needles 
directly into the true skin. Tattooing 
of the skin may soiuelirnes occur 
accidentally, as mhm particles of 
powder are deposited in tlie skin 
and leave permaneat stains. Miners 
occasionaly have permanent dis- 


708 



tear GIANDS 


TEETH 


coloration due to the imbedding of 
coal dust ia scratches. Silver and iron 
have an effect of tattooing when 
deposited in the skin. 

The tattooer will sometimes use his 
owe saliva as the moistemiig agent in 
tattooing, and various diseases, in- 
cluditig tuberculosis, erysipelas, bac~ 
teriai infection, viral hepatitis, and 
even venereal diseases have been 
transmitted io this manner. Occa¬ 
sionally tattooing produces reactions 
in the skin which result in the de¬ 
velopment of tumors. 

One of the methods to remove a 
tattoo is peeling the skin with a 
caustic substance. This is quite dan¬ 
gerous and even specialists in diseases 
of the skin hesitate to attempt it. 
It is also possible to cut away the 
entire tattooed area, if it is not too 
large, and graft new skin from 
another portion of the body over the 
area. A new and successful method 
involves sterilizing the area with 
antiseptics and then sandpapering the 
tattooed skin off its base. Bleeding is 
controlled and prompt healing en- 
coiirafcii Recently special burrs and 
emery wheels powered by motors 
have been used for planing. The skin 
is first made insensitive to pain by 
freezing it with ‘"Freon.” 

TEAK GLANDS* The little indenta¬ 
tion at the inner end of the eye is 
known as the tear gland and serves as 
a kind of reservoir for tears. From 
this reservoir several small tubes, 
called tear ducts, carry the tears to 
the eyes. 

Another tube, the nasal duct, 
carries a similar fluid to the nose. For 


this reason, whenever a person sheds 
tears, he will also find it necessary 
to blow Ms nose. 

The tear glands, as well as the 
ducts, may occasionally become in¬ 
fected. When this occurs, a swelling 
is seen at the comer of the eye and 
a small amount of pus will form. 
Often a person with this condition 
will press out the pus and apply a 
commercial medication without con¬ 
sulting a doctor, but professional 
assistance is always recommended 
since the infection may in some cases 
be serious enough to require the 
cutting or even the removal of the 
gland. See also eye. 

TEETH, the calcified organs sup¬ 
ported by sockets and gums of both 
jaws. Their chief function is to grind 
food into small enough pieces to be 
easily swallowed and digested. The 




A ^-enamel 

-s—^dentine 



Teeth — Cross section of a tooth showing 
the crown^ neck ond roofs and the infernal 
structures. Within the pulp cavity can be 
found nerves and blood vessels. 


709 



TEETH 


TEETH 



leetli—A full set of permanent teeth, 32 
in number. Upper jaw; f1) central incisor, 
(2) lateral incisor, (3) cuspid, (4) first bi¬ 
cuspid, (5) second bicuspid, (6) first molar, 

[ 7 ] second molar, |8) third molar, lower jaw; 

(8) third molar, (7) second molar, (6) first 
molar, {5)*second bicuspid, (4) first bicuspid, 
{3} cuspid, (2) lateral incisor, and (1) central 
incisor. 

teeth help to form words and also 
give expression. Their loss is usually 
associated with old age, and loss of 
teeth in a young person may require 
a major emotional adjustment. Sound 
teeth contribute to health, while de¬ 
cayed teeth and diseased gums per¬ 
mit germs to enter the body. Thus 


the teeth may become focal points ot 
infection and lead to other disorders. 

Anatomy of teeth. Teeth are com¬ 
posed largely of mineral salts, chiefly 
calcium and phosphorus, and also 
magnesium, fluorine, and other min¬ 
erals. A tooth consists of a crown, a 
neck, and one or more roots. The 
roots contain dentin, an ivory-like 
substance which is also found be¬ 
neath the crown, surrounding a hol¬ 
low, known as the pulp cavity, which 
is in the center. The pulp contains 
blood vessels, nerves, and loose con¬ 
nective tissue, including specialized 
nerve cells. 

The crown, composed of the in¬ 
tensely hard enamel which caps the 
tooth, may have two or more cusps, 
or points, on its biting surface. 
Enamel is derived from the same sub¬ 
stance as hair and nails. If the 
enamel is damaged by accident or 
disease once the tooth has erupted, 
natural repair is not possible, nor can 
decay on the surface or in fissures in 
the enamel be helped by drugs, 
vitamins, or nourishment from the 
blood stream. However, this Is not 
true for the rest of the tooth. 

The root of the tooth is covered 
by cement which in its structure 
resembles bone. The periodontal 
membrane is the membrane that 
holds the tooth within the jawbone, 
and the alveolar bone supports the 
tooth and anchors it to the jaw. The 
alveolus also supplies calcium salts to 
other parts of the body and acts as 
a kind of reservoir. Alveolar bone 
is therefore easfly affected by any 
disease that interferes with the cal¬ 
cium metabolism of the body. 


710 



TEETH 


tee™ 


The gums are the soft tissues that 
cover the alveolar bone, and are con^ 
tinuoiis With the mucous membranes 
of the iBoulli, lips, and cheeks. 

Dentition. The process of cutting 
teeth is ordinarily called tcetliiog or 
dentition* There are two dentitions; 
t!ie first produces the primary teeth, 
also known as the deciduous, tem¬ 
porary, or milk teeth, and the second 
produces the permanent teeth. There 
are twenty primary teeth: four in¬ 
cisors, two canines, and four molars 
in each jaw* The incisors are the 
front cutting teeth; the two in the 
middle are called central incisors, 
and those on either side are called 
lateral incisors. Outside these are the 
canine teeth which aie sharp, 
pointed, and able to tear food. Be¬ 
yond the canines are the molars or 
grinding teeth. The arrangement of 
teeth is the same in the upper and 
lower jaws and on the right and left 
sides. 

The second permanent set ot teeth 
contains thirty-two teeth. Twenty of 
these gradually replace the primary 
dentition, which starts at about six 
or seven years of age and finishes at 
about twelve years or older. This 
dentition begins with the appearance 
of the first permanent molars, and 
afterward other permanent teeth are 
cut, mcludiiig the central and lateral 
incisors, the fiM and second pre¬ 
molar, the cankes, and the second 
molar. The premolars which replace 


Teellt—Adult denflfion^ showing right side 
of the fow From fell to right* third moiars^ 
second molcirs, first moiars, second bicus¬ 
pid, first bicuspid, cuspid^ lateral incisor, 
central incisor. 


milk molars have two cusps on the 
crown and are also known as the 
bicuspids. The third molar teeth, the 
wisdom teeth, may appear between 
the ages of seventeen and twenty-five 
or later, or not at all. 

Disorders and diseases of teeth. 
The first teething is sometimes pain¬ 
ful and the gums swollen, hot, and 
tender. The child may be generally 
upset, and colds, earache, and fever 
are not uncommon during this period. 
The second dentition rarely causes 
any trouble, with the exception of 
aching which may accompany erup¬ 
tion of the wisdom teeth. 

Sometimes malocclusion, or ir¬ 
regularity in placement of teeth, may 
be found in the deciduous and the 
permanent dentitions. A special 
branch of dentistry, orthodontia, has 
been developed to correct malocclu¬ 
sion, and the earlier the condition 
reaches the attention of the specialist 
the quicker and more effective the 
treatment will be. 

Total or partial anodontia, or lack 
of teeth, is rare. Rickets may be the 
cause of delayed dentition or mal- 



711 




Teefrii-This series of photographs demonstrates the proper method 
of deaning the teeth. Brushing up and down, rather fhon ocross 
from left to right, removes food particles more effectively. The 
bocks of the teeth and the molars situated in the back port of the 
mouth should not be neglected. A good toothbrush is necessory to 
clean the teeth properly. The brush should be small so that the 
bristles may reach the front, bock ond sides of ctfl the feefh. The 
brush should be moistened with cold water before using, ond after 
using it should again be rinsed thoroughly with cold wafer, Keeping 
the brush in a container or ollowing the bristles to remoin moist 
for too long a time will destroy the effectiveness of the bristles. 
Since bacteria thrive on warm, moist bristles, the brush should 
be allowed to dry in the open air, If if is incarven.ujf tn 
brush the teeth after eating, rinsing will remove food porlicles 




TEETH 


TEETH 


formation of teeth. Premature emp- 
tion of teeth has little siguificance, 
except that it may cause discomfort 
to a mother who is still nursing. 

Mottling and discoloration may 
occur during formation of teeth, and 
is caused by excess iiiorine in the 
drinking water or the food. Occasion¬ 
ally the child’s teeth are malformed 
or incompletely calcified. These con¬ 
ditions should be treated by a dentist. 

A small amount of fluorine in 
drinking water, about one part per 
million, has been found to help pro¬ 
tect teeth against decay. Fluoridation 
of water has been tried successfully in 
many communities and is approved 
by all leading scientific organizations 
in medicine and dentistry. 

Unless teeth are adequately 
cleansed, tartar may form about the 
neck of the tooth and lead to infection 
of the gums, to pyorrhea and other 
disorders, and to diseases of the 
mouth. Food may adhere in spaces 
between the teeth and ferment, and 
acid substances attack the enamel and 
cause dental caries or tooth decay. 

Dental health. Although heredity 
helps determine the health of the 
teeth, good diet, adequate mastica¬ 
tion, good mouth hygiene, and 
regular visits to the dentist for ex¬ 
amination and cleaning are important. 

There is no single diet which can 
insure good teeth, but a well-balanced 
diet, containing proper amounts of 
proteins, carbohydrates, fats, miner¬ 
als, and vitamins, will encourage 
dental health just as it will general 
health. The teeth particularly need 
phosphorus and calcium, which is 
found abundantly in naik and milk 


products especially, and in leafy 
green vegetables, whole-grain cereal, 

and fish. 

Dentists recommend that teeth get 
plenty of chewing exercise, and every 
diet should include enough crisp and 
textured foods which require vigorous 
chewing. Chewing benefits not only 
teeth but jaws, nasal and breathing 
passages, and the stomach as well. 
Chewing crisp fruits and vegetables 
also helps to keep the teeth clean. 

Brushing the teeth should be part 
of everyone’s daily routine. The up¬ 
per teeth should be brushed down 
from the gum, and the lower teeth 
brushed up from the gum. Regular 
use of dental floss will help keep 
the areas between the teeth free of 
food deposits. 

Small cavities appear in the teeth 



Teeth—The diagrain illustrates the organs 
affected by abscessed teeth. 


7J3 



TEMPEiATUKE 


IEMPEI!A 1 URE 


wMch wil grow larger if aot treated. 
The dentist should be consulted and 
the teeth examined preferably three 
times^ and no less than twicer a year. 
See also dental caries; dentifrice; 
fluoridation; orthodontia; pyor¬ 
rhea; VINCENTES ANGINA. 

TEMPEEATUEEj the degree of in¬ 
tensity of heat of a body, especially 
as measured by the scale of a ther¬ 
mometer. The normal temperature of 
the human body is 98.6° F., with 
occasional variations during the day, 
amounting to no more than one 
degree. The temperature is generally 
slightly higher toward evening, when 
it may be 99.1°, and in early morn¬ 
ing it may fall to about 973°. 

A strict balance must be kept in the 
body between heat production and 
heat loss. To maintain a norma! tem¬ 
perature, excess heat is expelled from 
the body or extra heat produced. 
Heat is lost chiefly through perspira¬ 
tion and through the air and vapor 
expelled from the lungs. Heat is 
produced by chemical action in the 
muscles and in the glands, especially 
in the liver. Shivering, an involuntary 
muscular action, produces heat. 


The sensation of heat or cold is not 
due to a change in body temperature 
but to a change in the tee'^peiatiire of 


lOoJ 




Temperature—Whon flu body' cfu mistry 
operates normally the f'u at produc* cl by 
muscles and by qlcmds is lost by v/ny of the 
skin the lungs t nd flu excifto Whu! there 
IS fever, fhc loss u unahh to keep up v/dh 
the production 


NOftMAL 




t 


94- fa 8 


too 2 4- tot. 


D 


MERCURY IN BUli 
RISES IN 
HOLLOW TUBE 




98 


HEii 


99 


Teimperatiire-The normal range of temperature is between 98 and 99 degrees Folirenheit 
To read, look along the sharper edge between the numbers ond the Isoes 


714 







TENDOM 


TESTICLES 


the sLin. When the skin ieels cold or 
hoty a message is sent to the brain, 
the site ot a mecliamsm which con¬ 
trols temperature. Tins mechaEism is 
set Info action w^ith a corresponding 
drop or rise in temperature 
Disease may distuib the heat-regu¬ 
lating mechanism and cause the 
temperature to increase or decrease 
The temperature of a person sick 
witii a fever may rise to 104"^ or 
even higher. In severe cases, such as 
at the time of death, the fever may 
reach as high as 107° to 109°. The 
average fever thermometer has a 
maximiini of about 110°, above 
which death usually occurs. Cases 
have been recorded of death from 
heatstroke in which the persons had 
temperatures of over 110°, 

A temperature below 96° may 
represent collapse. In certain diseases 
and operative procedures, body tem¬ 
perature may be considerably below 
this figure for a period of time. 

Chitling of the body ordinarily is 
considered harmful to health. Chilling 
IS more serious for a person with a 
chronic infection of the nose and 
throat than for one in good health, 
and the response to chilling may be 
congestion in the nose and sinuses 
and the appearance of a condition 
like a cold. Some people are more 
susceptible to chilling than others, 
or aie so sensitive to either heat or 
cold that symptoms of allergy are 
manifested. See also chilblains; 
fever; frostbite; hazards of cold; 

THERMOMETER. 

TENDOM, or sinew, a fibrous band 
of connective tissue which unites a 
muscle with another part of the 


body, and transmits the force exerted 
by the muscle. See also achilles" 
tendon; bursitis; muscle. 

TESTICLES, or testes, the two male 
sex glands which hang outside the 
body m a small sac of skin called the 
scrotum. They perform two signifi¬ 
cant functions: they produce both the 
male reproductive cells, the sperm, 
and the male sex hormone, the in¬ 
ternal secretion which causes the body 
to assume the attributes of mascu¬ 
linity. 

Both sperm and so-called inter¬ 
stitial ceils originate within the testes, 
the tubular structures known as 
seminiferous tubules. When the 
sperm cells mature, they migrate to 
one of the two seminal vesicles lo¬ 
cated near the urinary bladder, where 
they remain until used. The inter¬ 
stitial cells remain in the testes, 
occupying the spaces between the 
tubules, and produce male sex hor¬ 
mones. 

The hormone known medically as 
testosterone has been extensively 
studied and found to have many 
effects in the body. Appearing in 
quantity only as puberty approaches, 
it evokes growth of the sex organs to 
their adult size. Stronger and heavier 
male bones and muscles are de¬ 
pendent on the testosterone, which 
also causes the vocal cords in the 
larynx to enlarge, resulting in the 
characteristic low pitch of the male 
voice, and prompts the growth of 
body hair. 

Testosterone has a definite effect 
on emotional and mental develop¬ 
ment, influencing adult interest in 


715 



TESTS 


TETANUS 


sex, and ideas and attitudes usually 
identified as adult and masculine. 

The body may contain at least one 
other male sex hormone, if not more, 
but this has not as yet been scientili- 
caliy established. 

The term eunuch signifies a male 
deprived of the testicles or of the 
external male genitals. Such men 
tend to lose many or most typically 
male characteristics. 

Disorders of the testes include in¬ 
fection, damage from mumps, cancer, 
or failure to descend normally into 
the scrotum. In addition, typhoid 
and undulant fever may affect these 
organs. Mumps reach the testicles in 
approximately one in a hundred 
cases, but sometimes more frequently 
in a major epidemic. Mumps cause 
the testes to swell painfully and some¬ 
times destroy their function perma¬ 
nently, a complication called orchitis. 
Epididymitis is an infection of the 
hoodlike structure covering the upper 
end of each testicle. The sulfa and 
antibiotic drugs are used advanta¬ 
geously in testicular infections. 

The testicles normally descend 
from within the body to the scrotum 
by the time of birth. However, this 
does not always occur. Since the 
internal temperature of the body is 
too high to permit the organs to 
produce sperm cells, the glands can¬ 
not develop and function properly. 
Therefore, when the testes do not 
descend, some of the male character¬ 
istics may be latent. Treatment by 
hormones alone may be sufficient, 
but often surgery is indicated to 
correct this condition, called crypt- 
orcMsm. 


Cancer ot the testes is rare The 
first sign of it is iisualH in the 
h mph nodes about the nccL J\nn or 
othei s 3 ^oiptoms lo the testicle it- 
seit occur Lite* Ste ahn orchitis; 

REPRODUCTION SYSTEM, ONPF- 
scFNDf D rrsTi S 

11^SIS, ! iic aKUa il I is ui ini 
dll nosi V tool i 

itoni ihi hitHHi pu '.ao, list whish 
the laniih diKti>i fTfU>iiiis 
da\ to the nioie wuiaplix Usfs ihtt 
aie iii thi iiKdH d i ilxa 

iatoi\ oi hos[Hi il 1 It,. aicilH il test 
nia\ he use if to ditu! llu {Uisenie 
ot a sptufit disi. isi oi lOiulilu^i! to 
determine susLeptihdit\ or imniu- 
nit\ to a spicitii iiisi isi ti\ lueisuie 
the rate and nuniic’ tii whfsh the 
hod\ IS huKtionine and tor vafunis 
other purpt'ise^ \ef\ otun a wom 
hination id tests iu iiskd in iiiieno- 
MS fhe shaft shons somt id the 
mme sixunion itsts f pes 7IH-7I9) 

TETANUS, or lockiaw, an infectious 
disease, often fata!, which especially 
attacks the muscles of the neck and 
lower jaw. This disease is caused by 
the tetanus bacillus, a geim, which 
ordinarily infests the intestines of 
cattle, horses, or men, and which is 
also found in the earth. The germ 
invades human beings pdmarily 
through wounds. Since it thrives best 
without oxygen, it is found most 
abundantly in deeper wounds, espe¬ 
cially those which contain soil or 
foreign refuse. 

About seven days after the in¬ 
vasion of the gcrni, the person in¬ 
fected is likely to^ feel a kind of 


716 



TETANY 


THiOAT 


puliing pain in the wound. This is 
accompanied by a spasm of the 
muscles. He may develop chEls and 
fever, a painful headache, and proba¬ 
bly a general feeling of irritability. 
Stiffness is first evident in the muscles 
of the Jaw and neck, and a series of 
violent convulsions and spasm may 
soon follow. Sometimes occurring as 
frequently as every minute, these 
spasms may be so extensive that every 
muscle in the body is involved. 

The tetanus bacillus engenders an 
exceedingly strong poison which may 
be fatal. Prevention of the disease 
consists of injecting an antitoxin 
under the skin as soon as a wound 
has been inflicted. The wound is then 
opened wide, tboroughly cleaned of 
foreign matter, and cleansed with 
antiseptic. This preventive technique 
is so efficient that not one death from 
tetanus was recorded among the U.S. 
forces during World War IL See also 

IMMUN'iZATION. 

TETAMY* See parathyroid glands. 

THEEMOMETEE, in medicine, the 

instrument used to take the tempera¬ 
ture of the body. In the United States, 
the Fahrenheit scale is most fre¬ 
quently used, usualy graduated be¬ 
tween 94*^ and 110"^. The normal 
body temperature, 98.6^, is generally 
indicated by an arrow. The centigrade 
thermometer is used in Europe. 

Before taking a temperature, the 
mercury must be shaken down be¬ 
low the normal mark. This is done 
either by firmly grasping the stem 
between the thumb and forefinger 
and shaking the thermometer forcibly 


in the air, or by holding the stem in 
the same way and striking the inner 
side of the wrist on the knee. 

The temperature can be taken in 
the mouth, armpit, groin, or rectum 
Before placing a thermometer in the 
armpit or groin, the part should be 
thoroughly dried and the thermome¬ 
ter placed between two skin surfaces, 
care being taken that clothing does 
not come between the bulb and the 
skin. For rectal temperatures, the 
bulb of the thermometer is smeared 
with a little petroleum jefiy and then 
gently manipulated into place. The 
thermometer should remain in the 
mouth or rectum for three to five 
minutes, and in the armpit or groin 
for seven to ten minutes. After use, 
the thermometer should be thor¬ 
oughly cleansed, sterilized, and stored 
in a safe place. 

THEOAT* The inside of the throat 
includes the larynx, the pharynx or 
voice box, the upper part or fauces, 
which is the space surrounded by the 
soft palate, a group of muscles used 
in swaUowing, the palatine arches 
and the base of the tongue. On the 
outside, the front part of the neck 
is also described as the throat. 

A sore throat is an inflammation of 
part of the throat. Inflammations are 
manifested by redness, sweHing, and 
excessive discharges of mucus due to 
many different sources. Most com¬ 
mon is exposure to cold, an extension 
of inflammation from the tonsils, 
adenoids, or the nose. 

One form of sore throat, pharyn¬ 
gitis, may be an entirely separate 
disease or the symptom of another 


717 



TEST 

PURPOSE OF TEST 

HOW f£ST iS MADF , 

Schick 

To cJpte nil ni f pf* on 
tested IS su:>tipcibk tc 
dipiuhtrn 

1 fill ^ « LS 

dtii 1 c M if hypo 

Dick 

To detL!rn m if ptison 
tested IS immuiit, to 
scarlet fe\ei 

hs u } s "™ j 

• kill on i mt su i 1 

'iiul n ecih 

Widal 

To determine if person 
tested has typhoid e>i 
paratyphoid fts er 

1 hi fine I 1 1 F I .. 1 5 i . — 

le te 1 St se I il I ut t f / 

de solut ( 1 If 1 t| i j f t ' fl M 

iiuid itor i? ! t If 1 ^ ^ n in 

to ietiiiuiu ft! 1 1 i'O'arc! 

Tuberculin 

To aid in delernnnuis^' 
presence of tuhercuiosis 
infection 

1) 1 Itt f £ 15 1 — J — 

u udiy on f nit t i I I 

from eukui f £f l » ‘ pfspired 

b rty < ^ht 1 ur ' ' 

Sedimenfafion 

To aid m dne^nos ncr 
tuberculosis and acute, 
infections suth a 

rheumatic fc\tr 

list to r 1 11 1 ^ t r . '""“"‘a 

mivid svuh <!t t 1 { 1 I f ^ 

Spt III t 1 ti 1 

of Xii iUH> sell Si lid f <fn 1 . 

Compie- 

meffit 

Fixation 

io liti in d at^nos nvij 
syphilis (Also e Hid 
Wasseimann K shn 

test etc ) 

Io No 1 j inmi i iii Hi i ft » t.,, , —T. 

\ inou t, ti i< t III £ i ^ 

Aschheim- 

Zondek 

lo determine if pi eg 
nancy has occurred 

Spts imn of uruu ft r ^ t*nl i “*! -- 

<‘■'■^*•1 «Ki th<n , ( ,r 

muc (la lncd..,>n ..u M . , . . uV» . ,i 

Basal Me¬ 
tabolism 

io aid in d!ai,no me 
hyroid md otiu r 

ghneiuhr disturbances 

J- itKiK f.. uh< ,m „i « „ ,1-/7-^- J, 

h. itp.oduct m , i 1) ht- lit, „f 

«>»u...p„nn I,, . ,, , , ,, “ kl j": 

pit»iu,t<,u I.t, , J 1, i ,,,t i, 

Hemoglobin 

Determination 

Io determine unount 
of hemoglobm m 
blood 

kifn nt s finv II p ui < i j I ^ 

inioimt of Mo ' i 1 ivwi i , r ,, , ‘ ^ ^ o*ed 

hlori^oiy lest r oi j t ^ I , , /, ' ^ hifhfr 

s blonc uii n ui n lis lia» 

Red Blood Cell 
Defermincitioo 

To determine pie ene'e 
of anemia or polyry 
t hernia 

T ilfffTollTTt, 7, t !~ i ,7 i )„r, 1 , , , r ! 1 ".ml 

>f''-1 op.. 1«.1 iiu .. ,1. „ i n . uF 

White 

Blood Cell 
Determinafiori 

Io aid m dete-minmt, 
prestme oi infections 
or leukemia. 


Urine 

lo determne piesuiu, ’ 
of kidney disease or 
diabetes 

I ni t psemien r e\ 1 I 5 7 il U t t Ft — 

ana Wh.u hlooa <.a. «..} snV.. ’ 

Clotting 

Tim® 

To test dotting ability" 1 
oi blood 

SKW .s punttuied aiul tiaiir t tiinUMl 1 rinie 1 Jr, dinilSifT 

rrofitromoln 

Time 

ira i a!y ii*^ j* rtiti»* 

lo determine %uta 
mm-K deficiency , 


aFwSSUr® 

Io detect Iwgii or low' 1 
Mood pressure* j 

« 

‘ 'i‘‘>»K~r7fr7f77rb; 

tontr^tion (svstoiir'l !!'**r"*i* **'"”* «rnmi( rrfotd at 

ntractron (systolic) and relaxation (diutolio) of heart 


718 




INTERPRETAIiON OF TEST 

REMARKS 

Positive reaction shown by red area at point 
where to^in was injectea Negatne reaction indi¬ 
cates person is immune to diphtheiia 

Schick testing of children about every two or 
three years is advised by many physicians ^ also 
testing of adults before inoculation during epi¬ 
demics 

^osifi^e reaction consists of red area one centi¬ 
meter or more m diameter occurrmg eighteen 
to twenty four hours after injection No reaction 
indicate immunity to scarlet fever 

Some physicians do not consider the Dick-test 
results comparable in dependability with those ol 
the Schick test 

CiuiBpmg of germs brought aboi t by this serum 
indicates that patient has typhoid lever 

Test IS of no value if person has had typhoid 
fever previously, or if he has been vaccinated 
against the disease 

Positive reaction is a red area about the point of 
iiijccnoii after forty-eight hours 

Tuberculin, test should always be considered in 
conjunction with other examinations 

Sprtcled up sedimentation rate is evidence of the 
presence of some infection 

Many factors influence sedimentation rate, such 
as room temperature, concentration «pf red blood 
! cells, length of sedimentation tube 

Re iciions aie judged by degree to which destruc¬ 
tion of red blood cells is prevented 

home doctors now deem it advisable to report the 
complement-flxation reactions only as positive, 
doubtful, or negative. 

If the mice’s ovaries arc enlarged, test is positive 
for pregnancy 

Test stated to be reliable after tenth day follow¬ 
ing first missed menstrual period Test remains 
positive until seven days after the birth of a full- 
term baby Other new tests involve use of frogs, 
rabbits, etc 

Tee percent or more above or below normal— j 
between plus or nimus seven—indicates an ab¬ 
normal condition Above is a ?ign of hyperthy¬ 
roidism 

Useful only in conjunction with physical examina¬ 
tion and study of patient’s symptoms For accu¬ 
rate results in test, patient must be completely 
relaxed Test is made after patient has fasted 
for twelve hours and has rested thirty minutes 
just before test 

Decrease in hemoglobm means anemia 

Sahli’s method is briefly described here There 
are other methods, but none is absolutely accu¬ 
rate 

Decrease of re 3 blood cells below 4,500,000 to 
bjCKKjijOoo per cubic millimeter indicates anemia 

When normal care is taken in this test, results are 
invariably reliable 

Abose normal usually indicates infection 

Same as above 

Albumin may indicate acute or chronic kidney 
inflammation or inftetson of kidney Red blood 
cells may be present m acute nephritis and m 
tumors 01 stones of the kidney Large numbers 
of white blood cells indicate a bladder infection 
or mfection of the kidney pelvis Sugar usually 
means diabetes 

Color and odor of urine, presence of sediment, its 
reaction—^that is, whether alkaline or acid—its 
specific gravity, are all important m diagnosing 
kidney and related disorders 

Usual time is one to three minutes. 

Used in purpura and hemophilia 

Test shows insufficient amount of substance neces¬ 
sary for clotting blood 

Technique used before gall-bladder operations 
and m liver inflammation 

Normal rate w approximately lao plus years over 
twenty to thirty. 

Routine m life-insurance examination 


719 























THROMBOSIS 


THROMBOSIS 


aMmeiit, such as scarlet fever, in¬ 
fluenza, measles, or smallpox. 

Excessive use of tobacco, exposure 
to large amounts of dust, smoke, 
irritating fumes, and sudden changes 
in temperature or excessive dryness 
and similar atmospheric conditions 
may cause irritation of the throat. 
Persons who are sensitive to certain 
food substances frequently react with 
blisters on the tissues of the throat, 
which become infected and pioducc 
irritations and inflammation. Swelling 
and Mammation of the throat may 
produce pain in the ears, because of 
blocking of the tubes which pass 
from the nose to the ear. A sense of 
fullness or obstruction, with much 
spitting and hawking, can also de¬ 
velop. 



fliroaf-inspecfion of the throat is an im¬ 
portant part of physical examination. 
Changes in the throat or a sore throat may 
be symptoms of Infection or a disease in 
another part of the body. To treat on in¬ 
fected area in the throat the doctor wses 
a tongue depressor and applicator. 


In "sttep fhiuil, winch IS septic 
soie thioai CMUSi d b\ the slicpto- 
coccus geinu a inenibianc, a thin 
la}Ci oi tissue, wuiKtinies appears 
in the thioat, the plaiuls nw} swell, 
and the fenipciatiiu ma\ use as high 
as lib’ I. Pcnicilhii geiicrall) ciiies 
this condition 

Application of an iie pack nia\ re¬ 
lieve the pam oi an mil imed thioat. 
Most doctois Ice! tiiai gargles are 
inefTectisc since lhc\ seldom leach 
into the thfoal, although they may 
help to remove mucus and to wash 
out inteefed material Direct appli¬ 
cation of an antiseptic to the thioat 
gives a specific eiket. Lithcr an 
atomizer oi a cotton swab may be 
used. To he sme that the antiseptic 
reaches the hack oi the throat, it 
may be necessaiy hold Ihe tongue 
or use a tongue depicssor or atom¬ 
izer. 

The primal y puipose ol a month- 
wash or thioat wash K to clean and 
soothe. A good cleansing mouthwash 
is salt solution, made by adding a 
fourth of a Icaspocm of salt to half a 
glass of warm water. !t mucus is 
profuse, the addirion of a quarter oi 
a teaspoon of bicarbonate of soda, 
ordinary baking soda, may be bene¬ 
ficial See also laryngiiis; qoihsy; 
SEPTIC SORE throat; sore iiieoat. 

THROMBOSISji, a clot formation in¬ 
side a blood vessel; the clot is called 
a ihrombos. Thrombosis is caused by 
failure of the mechanism in the blood 
which keeps it fluid* Such t disorder 
usually occurs in veins in which 
the flow of Mctod is slowed, as in a 
varicose vein of the leg, or in a leg 


720 



THRUSH 


THUMB SUCKING 


vein of a person who must lie in bed 
for a long time. In some cases, throm¬ 
bosis is associated with bacterial in¬ 
fection in the area affected, or in an 
actual inflammation of the vein, as 
in thrombophlebitis. Thrombosis may 
also occur in narrow arteries through 
which the blood passes with diflSculty, 
but arterial thrombosis is much rarer 
than venous thrombosis. 

Thrombosis does harm by obstruct¬ 
ing the flow of blood to and from the 
part supplied by the vessel and as a 
source of traveling fragments of clots, 
or emboli. An embolus is especially 
dangerous when it affects the lung, 
and there is always danger of sudden 
death. 

Thrombosis is often the source of 
stroke, although a stroke caused by 
thrombosis is less dramatic and 
severe than one from an embolism or 
with hemorrhage. Strokes from 
thrombosis have a better chance for 
recovery, but some permanent dis¬ 
ability usually persists. 

A clot In the main vein of a limb 
produces swelling. For example, a 
clot in a mam vein of the leg, deep 
in the upper calf, will cause a swell¬ 
ing of the foot and ankle and proba¬ 
bly most of the leg below the obstruc¬ 
tion. The amount of harm done 
depends on what area the artery 
supplies and whether or not there are 
alternative routes for the blood. If 
there is no alternative route, all the 
living cells which compose the part 
supplied will die. The effect is 
exactly the same as that of an 
embolism or of complete blocking 
and obliteration of the artery by 
progressive hardening and narrowing. 


Thrombosis is treated by certain 
anticoagulants, including heparin, 
dicumarol, and others, and in some 
cases surgery is employed to remove 
clots and help restore the flow of 
blood to the affected parts. Antico¬ 
agulants together with proper mas¬ 
sage and exercise have been particu¬ 
larly effective for patients with 
swollen legs due to thrombophlebitis 
when infection is not a complicating 
factor. In some cases of varicose 
veins, a thrombus may change into 
fibrous or scarlike tissue and the in¬ 
side of the tube is obliterated. In 
this way a natural cure is sometimes 
effected. See also apoplexy, coagu¬ 
lation; CORONARY thrombosis; 

EMBOLISM. 

THRUSH, a fungus infection of the 
mouth in infants and occasionally 
older persons. White spots form, then 
become shallow ulcers. Frequently 
fever and gastrointestinal disturbance 
are present. The fungus may spread 
to the buttocks, groin, and other areas 
of the body. 

THUMB SUCKING. In a healthy 
happy baby, thumb sucking, if prac¬ 
ticed in moderation, is normal and 
may be ignored. The child will dis¬ 
cover new amusement with the pas¬ 
sage of time. Persistent thumb suck¬ 
ing, authorities claim, may lead to 
malocclusion of the teeth. If the 
child ceases sucking his thumb be¬ 
fore the age of five, however, this 
malocclusion has a tendency to cure 
itself. 

To cure a persistent thumb sucker 
is not easy. Painting the thumb with 
a bad-tasting medicme or forcing 


721 



THYMUS GLAND 


rHYROiD Gland 


the child to wear a mittea have not 
been successful methods and are not 
recommended. The source ol the 
habit lies in some kind of emotional 
disturbance or sense of insecurity. To 
cure thumb sucking, therefore, the 
source of the habit should be found. 
See also child care. 

THYMUS GLAND, a gland located 
in the chest near the heart. Its 
functions are not as yet established. 
This gland has an unusual part in the 
development of the body. Instead of 
growing like the rest of the physical 
structure, the thymus is largest during 
the first eight or nine months of life 
and after the second year normally 
shrinks almost to the point of dis¬ 
appearance and is replaced by other 
types of tissue. 

If the gland does not shrink and its 
size and activity continue, the re¬ 
sults can be serious. Occasionally, 
especially in infants, the gland en¬ 
larges so much that it interferes with 
circulation and breathing, because of 
its proximity to the heart and wind¬ 
pipe. X-ray treatment is often bene¬ 
ficial to reduce such an enlargement. 
Persons may develop thymic en¬ 
largement so suddenly, apparently in 
response to some stress or shock, that 
death results. This type of growth 
occurs in the condition called status 
lymphaticus, which is rare. 

The person whose thymus gland 
has failed to shrink has a “peaches 
and cream” complexion and, if male, 
will probably not have to shave, or 
infrequently. Such persons seem 
younger than their actual age. They 


lack body hair und may be subject 
to low blood pressure and laligiie. 

In premature cessation of function¬ 
ing of the thjmiis, aging seems to 
occur before the usual time, and 
blood pressure is apt to be high and 
body hair exccsshc. 

In laboratory c.\pciiinciits in which 
animals haw been administered thy¬ 
mus c.\tract, their growth and de¬ 
velopment, both sexual and mental, 
have been precocious even into the 
second and third generations. How¬ 
ever, giantism does not occur. 

Investigation ot the thymus is still 
in an early stage. I he thymus is 
apparently implicated with develop¬ 
ment ot the skeleton, the sex glands, 
and w'ith metabolism oi calcium. See 
also GLANDS. 

THYROID GLAND. One ot the 
most significant of the endocrine 
glands, which produce secretions that 
regulate many basic processes of the 
body, the thyroid gland lies in the 
front part of the throat along the 
windpipe. 

The thyroid secretion, fhyro.Kin, 
is involved in the process ot oxida¬ 
tion which occurs within the cells 
and by which the tissue.s generate the 
energy they require. Its importance 
is indicated by the serious conse¬ 
quences of excessive or deficient 
amounts of it in the body. A child 
born with insufficient thyroid activity’ 
becomes a cretin, physically under¬ 
grown and mentally an idiot. Thy¬ 
roid deficiency in later life causes 
physical and mental coarsening and 
dulling. Excessive thyroid produces 


722 



TIC DOULOUREUX 


TIC DOULOUREUX 



Thyroid Gland Moderate enlargement of the thyroid gland caused by a noninfecfious 
disease (left) This type of inflammation affects men much less frequently than women. The 
gland enlarges gradually and one area may be more prominent than another. The photo¬ 
graph {nghf) taken two months later, shows regression of the enlargement. Patient was 
treated with desiccated thyroid, a substance made from the thyroid of sheep. Desiccated 
thyroid is used to treat certain thyroid conditions affecting human beings. 


general restlessness, speeds up the 
heart, and may have other untoward 
effects. Both hyperth 5 rroidism, too 
much thyroid, and hypothyroidism, 
too little, can be successfully treated. 

The thyroid is susceptible to a 
variety of diseases, the most com¬ 
mon being simple goiter, usually due 
to a lack of iodine. In Graves’ dis¬ 
ease, or exophthalmic goiter, over- 
activity of the thyroid causes a pop- 
eyed appearance and other serious 
symptoms. Tumors too, of lesser or 
greater malignancy, may affect the 
thyroid. Surgical removal is indicated 
for most types of thyroid cancer. 
X-ray and radium treatment and 
radioactive iodine have also been 


beneficial in certain cases. A number 
of infectious and noninfectious dis¬ 
eases of the thyroid also respond well 
to treatment. See also basal metab¬ 
olism; cretinism; glands; goiter; 

HYPOTHYROIDISM. 

TIC DOULOUREUX, or trigeminal 
neuralgia, one of the more common 
neuralgias or paroxysmal pains, usu¬ 
ally beginning in the middle life and 
occurring more frequently in women. 
John Fothergill originally described 
it in 1776 as an intense stabbing pain 
which strikes one or a combination 
of three facial branches supplied by 
the trigeminal or fifth cranial nerve. 

The attacks occur without warning, 


723 




IINNilUS 


TOBACCO 


in violent, knifelike darts of pain. 
The face is twisted in spasms and 
there is a free flow of tears and 
saliva. The seizure lasts only a few 
seconds and may clear up spontane¬ 
ously, with varying periods of relief. 
The pain may involve the first or 
ophthalmic division which includes 
the forehead and eye, the second 
division around the nose, or the third 
or side of the mouth. The second 
and third branches seem to be more 
frequently affected. The pain does 
not spread to the back of the head 
or across to the other side of the face. 
The attacks tend to increase in acute¬ 
ness and extent and as the condition 
becomes worse the periods of free¬ 
dom from pain become shorter. The 
seizures often are influenced by sea¬ 
sonal changes and occur more fre¬ 
quently during spring and fall. Pain 
may be prompted by touching the 
affected side of the face, by exposure 
to cold, washing, eating, drinking, or 
talking, and emotional tension or 
fatigue intensify the attack. 

Treatment consists largely of meas¬ 
ures to relieve individual attacks. 
Nicotinic acid and trichlorethylene 
inhalations give temporary relief. Al¬ 
cohol injections, once widely used, 
have been discontinued because re¬ 
lief from pain is too often incom¬ 
plete and the periods of relief be¬ 
tween injections tend to become 
increasingly shorter. Alcohol injec¬ 
tions are now given m some clinics 
before the operation for trigeminal 
neuralgia in order to accustom the 
patient to the facial numbness which 
generally follows the operation. The 
operation itself is now common and 


consists in cutting the branch or 
branches of the trigeminai nerve 
which carry the pain to the alTectcd 
area of the face. In those cases in 
which the eye is involved and the 
first branch is cut, the patient is given 
special instruction in care ot the eye, 
since sensation in this area is affected 
when the nerve is cut and the patient 
is unable to detect the presence of 
foreign bodies in the eye. 

TINNITUS. See NOisi . 

TOBACCO, a plant trom which the 
leaf is especially dried, cured, and 
prepared for chewing or smoking 
in the form of cigars or cigarettes. 
Tobacco, especially in the form of 
cigarettes, is so popular that it takes 
a place on almost every family bud¬ 
get along with food, clothing, and 
shelter. 

Many disorders ot the human 
body such as respiratory infections, 
neuralgia, gastrointestinal difficulties, 
headache, inability to sleep, consti¬ 
pation, diarrhea, heart murmur, and 
cancer have been attributed to smok¬ 
ing. The cause-and-etTect relationship 
is seldom clear. 

Smoking docs have a deleterious ef¬ 
fect on the blood vessels and the 
circulation of the blood. A definite 
relationship has been determined be¬ 
tween smoking and Buerger’s di.s- 
ease, which is characterized by in¬ 
flammation of the lining of the blood 
vessels. 

Excessive smoking of cigarettes, 
according to recent evidence, may 
possibly be related to cancer of the 
lung. As yet the results are not com¬ 
pletely scientifically established but 


724 



TOENAILS 


TONSILS 


many serious research investigations 
are currently being made. To offset 
the danger phenomena, cigarettes are 
being manufactured with filters 
which, with varying degrees, prevent 
the passage of the harmful ingredi¬ 
ents. 

TOENAILS. See nails. 

TONGUE, the movable muscular 
organ attached to the floor of the 
back of the mouth. Its chief func¬ 
tions are to help with chewing and 
swallowing food, with taste, and to 
form sounds in speech. 

The taste buds are on the side of 
the projections, or papillae, which 
lie across the tongue at the juncture 
of the mouth and the pharynx. A 
fold of membrane, the frenum, joins 
the undersurface of the tip of the 
tongue to the floor of the mouth. 
Sometimes the frenum is abnormally 
short and results in “tongue-tied” 
speech, which can usually be reme¬ 
died by a simple operation. 

Normally the tongue is pinkish 
white in color, moist and clean; a 
tongue that is dry, dark, and furry 
indicates disease. Among the most 
common of peculiar sensations that 
disturb persons is a burning painful 
tongue. The tongue, like all other 
tissue of the human body, is con¬ 
nected with the nervous system, and 
a burning sensation in the tongue 
is reflected through its nerves. In 
some cases, a relationship exists be¬ 
tween this burning and vitamin de¬ 
ficiency, anemia, lack of iron, or 
even an allergy, but when no ap¬ 
parent physical cause exists, purely 


mental reasons are thought to be 
responsible—for example, a woman 
in menopause who is worried about 
developing cancer might experience 
a burning tongue. 

Sometimes the tongue is inflamed 
through contact with edges of rough 
teeth, or ill-fitting false teeth. Fre¬ 
quently burning tongue is associated 
with difficulties of the digestive sys¬ 
tem. In such cases, the doctor will 
want to make a complete examina¬ 
tion, which includes blood tests as 
well as checking the digestive system. 

In a few instances, burning, and 
even ulcers, of the tongue have been 
found to be caused by the fact that 
different electric potentials have been 
used to fill teeth on opposite sides of 
the mouth. In a condition called glos¬ 
sitis, the tongue itself is infected and 
may have superficial or deep ab¬ 
scesses. The tongue may be subject to 
cancer or other specific diseases. 

Sometimes the surface of the 
tongue, instead of being smooth, be¬ 
comes marked by deep furrows and 
elevations. This condition, called 
geographic tongue, is not infectious 
and may be helped by mouthwashes, 
mild antiseptics, and a diet rich in 
vitamins and antianemic substances 
such as iron and liver. Black patches 
or hairlike projections can also form 
on the papillae. See also glossitis. 

TONSILLECTOMY. See TONSILS. 

TONSILS, masses of spongy lymph¬ 
oid tissue located at the sides of the 
throat in the entrance to the digestive 
and respiratory tracts. They fre¬ 
quently become infected, with such 
symptoms as swelling, inflammation, 

725 



TORTICOLLSS 


TOXEMIA 


pain, soreness, difficulty in swallow¬ 
ing, enlargement of the glands of the 
throat, fever, a rapid pulse, and 
general illness. 

The person affected with tonsillitis 
should be put to bed and the doctor 
called. Ice packs or hot compresses 
may be applied about the throat and 
neck to relieve pain. The doctor will 
take steps to combat fever. Early 
administration of drugs, particularly 
antibiotics, greatly reduces the possi¬ 
bility of serious complications or 
aftereffects, which can include deaf¬ 
ness, kidney disease, rheumatic fever 
and other heart ailments. 

Extraction of diseased and en¬ 
larged tonsils and adenoids, which 
interfere with breathing, is usually 
beneficial not only in removing a 
source of infection but also in im¬ 
proving the child’s general health, 
appearance, and disposition. Surgery 
to remove tonsils is advised in re¬ 
current attacks of tonsillitis accom¬ 
panied by swelling of the neck glands. 
The operation, tonsillectomy, is so 
common and has been so well per¬ 
fected that complications are exceed¬ 
ingly rare. 

In older persons or in the presence 
of heart disease and other cases in 
which anesthetic is not possible, 
tonsils are sometimes treated with 
radiation by x-ray. X-ray and radium 
are also occasionally used to treat 
fragments of tissue that may be left 
after tonsillectomy and when there is 
regrowth of secondary adenoidal tis¬ 
sue. 

TORTICOLLSS, commonly called 
wry neck, a spasmodic movement of 


the neck muscles which causes the 
head to be pulled toward one side. 
In some instances, shortening of neck 
muscles is present at birth or may 
occur from an injury, but in the 
majority of cases the origin of tfiis 
disorder is unknown. 

Wry neck begins suddenly without 
warning. The neck muscles unex¬ 
pectedly contract and the head is 
pulled to one side in irregular jerks. 
It may follow a nervous reaction due 
to tension, worry, or anxiety. At this 
stage the movements can be sup¬ 
pressed by the person, but as the 
condition grows worse the movements 
recur involuntarily and cannot be 
controlled. 

Psychotherapy has been success¬ 
fully tried in treatment of some cases. 
In more stubborn cases, this treat¬ 
ment is combined with a nerve block, 
a procedure in which the cervical 
nerves are blocked with procaine or 
novocaine. Light exercises also help 
to relax the muscles. Frequent peri¬ 
ods of spontaneous relief occur, but 
the condition generally returns, even 
after long intervals of relief. Use of 
collars or casts is not recommended. 
Medication includes drugs of the 
belladonna group and sedatives. Sur¬ 
gery has brought only temporary 
relief at best, and is not widely em¬ 
ployed. 

TOXEMIA a condition in w'hich the 
blood contains poisonous products, 
either those created by the body cells 
or those due to the action of micro¬ 
organisms. It is a general infection 
in which the blood contains toxins but 
not bacteria. 


726 



TRACHEA 


TRENCH FEVER 


TKACill’A, or 'Ainupipc, a tube 
about ijiches loiiy wfuch leads 
from ihe nioaih and iannx to the 
lungs. U is si»>i’eptihle to intections 
similar to those that attack anv other 
part ot the respiratory s' stern. In¬ 
flammation of the trachea produces 
a hacking metallic cough, especially 
scserc at night. 1 his cough oiten pro¬ 
duces considerahle pain, particularly 
in the lover pari of the neck and 
behind the hreastbonc. If the intlani- 
mation continues unchecked, mucus 
and sputum are eructed in coughing; 
and it the germ is streptococcus, pus 
may also be expectorated. 

Tieatincnt tor ordinary inflamma¬ 
tion of the trachea is rest in bed, 
warmth and quiet. A vaporizer, usu¬ 
ally an electrical device w'hich 
moistens arul vaporizes the air the 
patient breathes, often brings relief. 
Medicated oil added to the water 
which is boiled in tire vaporizer also 
has been found heneficial. 

Ordinarily the inflammation will 
yield to proper trcatrnerrt. In severe 
cases, which might often have become 
chronic in the pa.st, the sulfa dnigs 
or penicillin will usually eradicate 
the specific infection. 

The tube may be obstructed by a 
physiologicrtl procc.ss, as in stran¬ 
gling, by a foreigrt object, or by dis¬ 
ease. Surgical operation, trache¬ 
otomy, is performes.1 in some 
instances to correct the condition. 

TRACHOMA, a highly contagious 
chronic disease of the eyelids, caused 
by a filterable virus. Trachoma was 
once an almo.st universal affliction 
and the most common cause of blind¬ 


ness. It is still widespread in Egypt, 
Iridia, China, and other Eastern coun¬ 
tries where the standards of health 
and sanitation are low. Trachoma has 
affected many American Indians and 
may still be found in the southern 
mountainous areas of this country. 

Trachoma is most contagious in 
the early stages and is spread by con¬ 
tact with infected persons, insects, or 
contaminated objects. The eyes be¬ 
come inflamed and congested, tears 
pour out excessively, and light is 
painful. Blisters and crusts appear on 
the upper lids and form scar tissue. 
Small gritty particles develop on the 
cornea, and in severe cases vision is 
so diminished that only light and 
dark can be distinguished. 

Treatment of trachoma requires 
the care of a specialist. Each stage 
of the disease, from the first inflam¬ 
mation of the eyes to the development 
of granulations and finally scar tis¬ 
sue, demands expert handling. Rig¬ 
orous hygienic measures must be ob¬ 
served to keep the eyes clean at all 
times. Sulfonamide drugs and anti¬ 
biotics have made possible control of 
the spread of trachoma. 

TOANQUnLIZING DRUGS. See 

BARBITURATES. 

TRENCH FEVER, a mild acute 
rickettsial infection. During World 
War I it was a major medical prob¬ 
lem, It occurred during World War II 
also, but on a much smaller scale. 

Trench fever is transmitted from 
person to person by the body louse, 
and causes headache and fever, ver¬ 
tigo, pain in the back, legs, and eyes. 


727 



TRENCH MOUTH 


TRICHINOSIS 


A distinctive rash appears on the 
chest, back, and abdomen which usu¬ 
ally disappears in about twenty-four 
hours. Convalescence is prolonged. 
The pain and discomfort can be con- 
troled by drugs prescribed by a 
physician, and bed rest and hygienic 
and dietary measures help forestall a 
relapse. 

Prevention of trench fever con¬ 
sists chiefly of delousing methods and 
sterilization of contaminated articles. 
The urine and sputum should be dis¬ 
infected by chemicals or heat to 
prevent spreading the disease. See 
also RICKETTSIAL DISEASES. 

TRENCH MOUTH. See Vincent’s 

ANGINA. 

TRICfflNOSES, a disease caused by 
eating pork infected by Trichinella 
spiralis, a slender roundworm that is 
barely visible to the naked eye. If 
the worms have not been destroyed 
by proper cooking, they may develop 
in the intestines and later invade the 
muscle tissue, where they produce 
stiffness and painful swelling. 

Tiny cysts, encasing immature 
worms, are present in contaminated 
pork. The human digestive process 
liberates them in the intestines, and 
they mature within a few days. The 
developed males fertilize the females, 
which then burrow into the mtestinal 
wall and subsequently release larvae. 

These larvae, carried through the 
blood circulation, lodge in the mus¬ 
cles, encysting themselves within a 
shell-like substance that they secrete. 
There they cause the pain and mus¬ 
cular irritation which are characteris¬ 


tic of the disease. Other symptoms 
are headache, fever, sore throat, gen¬ 
eral illness, and painfully swollen 
eyes. Specific treatment for the dis¬ 
ease is not yet known. In lime, the 
tissues of the body surround the or¬ 
ganisms and wall them off. 

Protection against trichinosis is 
possible in at least two ways. Since 
the trichinae cannot survive freezing 
or more than a certain degree of 
heat, they can be killed by freezing 
the meat at 0“ F. for twenty-four 
hours or at 5° F. for twenty days, or 
by cooking at 140° F. or more for 
half an hour per pound of meat. 

Another method of protecting 
against trichinosis is to prevent the 
infection in hogs. A principal source 
of trichinosis is uncooked garbage 
fed to hogs. Field-fed and grain-fed 
hogs have an infection rate of about 
.5 per cent, whereas animals fed on 
garbage which has not been heat- 
treated to kill trichinae have an in¬ 
fection rate of 5 per cent. Just as in¬ 
fected pork may be rendered safe for 
human consumption by proper cook¬ 
ing, so may garbage be made safe for 
pigs. 

Epidemics of trichinosis are usu¬ 
ally small and localized, and are a.s- 
sociated with consumption of con¬ 
taminated meat which can often be 
traced to one source. More than a 
quarter of pork consumed in the 
United States is processed without 
the close government supervision 
which is given in big packing plants 
and thus much pork offered for sale 
may harbor live trichinae. Most 
Americans probably consume con¬ 
taminated pork at least once a year, 


728 



TRiGEMiNAL NEURALGIA 


TUBERCULOSIS 


but have no ill effects because the 
meat has been thoroughly cooked. 
The disease is, of course, more likely 
to occur when pork and pork prod¬ 
ucts are eaten in a raw or semi-raw 
condition. 

TRIGEMINAL NEURALGIA. See 

TIC DOULOUREUX. 

TUBERCULOSIS, an infectious dis¬ 
ease characterized by the production 
of tubercles, small rounded nodules 
which may appear on almost any 
part of the body. It is caused by the 
germ commonly called the tubercle 
bacillus, of which there are many 
varieties. 

The past decade has seen tremen¬ 
dous advances in the control and 
treatment of tuberculosis. The death 
rate in the United Stales has dropped 
from 250 out of every 100,000 per- 
son.s to rates as low as 5 in many 
slates. 

Tuberculosis remains a chronic 
disease and if healing is not com¬ 
plete, relapse may occur. Although in 
the acute phases of the disease, the 
new drugs act quickly to promote 
healing, treatment of the tuberculous 
patient may require a long time. The 
discovery and application of new 
drugs, like streptomycin, para-amino¬ 
salicylic acid, and isoniazid, has virtu¬ 
ally revolutionized the management 
of tuberculosis, and patients can now 
be treated by a combination of hos¬ 
pital and home care rather than being 
placed in sanatoriums. The closing 
of Trudeau at Saranac Lake, New 
York, was a dramatic indication of 
the change in approach to the treat¬ 
ment of tuberculosis. However, sana- 


toriums are still advisable in some 
cases where hospital and home care 
is not adequate. 

In the past, tuberculosis was sel¬ 
dom suspected until severe coughs 
with expectoration, followed by loss 
of weight and night sweats, set in. 
With modem methods, the disease 
can be detected long before such 
serious symptoms have developed. 
X-ray pictures reveal changes which 
have occurred in the lung, and mobile 
units for lung x-rays are now com¬ 
mon in many communities. Another 
method of detecting tuberculosis is 
the tuberculin test. A small amount 
of tuberculin, a material containing 
proteins of the tubercle bacillus, is 
applied to the skin or in some cases 
injected between the layers of the 
skin. A positive skin reaction indi¬ 
cates that the tissues have been sensi¬ 
tized to the tuberculer germ, and that 
the germs are present and an infec¬ 
tion exists somewhere in the body. 
Occasionally the reactions to the 
tuberculin test may be doubtful and 
additional tests, including sputum 
and smear tests, are necessary. Gen¬ 
erally if the test is positive, other 
tests, such as the bacteriological diag¬ 
nosis, are given to establish beyond 
doubt that tuberculosis is present. 
Tuberculin-positive cases showing 
chronic lung infection and confirmed 
by x-ray are usually considered as 
tuberculous, unless the bacteriologi¬ 
cal diagnosis indicates otherwise. 
Certain fimgus diseases of the lung 
precisely imitate tuberculosis. 

The germ causing tuberculosis was 
first described in 1882 by the bac¬ 
teriologist Robert Koch. A variety of 

729 



TUBERCULOSIS 


TUBERCULOSIS 


these germs exists some affecting 
primarily hEmaii beings and others 
cattle^ birds^ or cold-blooded ani¬ 
mals, The cattle type of germ may 
infect human beings, usually through 
the milk of infected cattle, and is 
largely responsible for tuberculosis of 
the bones, joints, and lymph glands, 
especially in children. However, the 
incidence of tuberculosis in cattle has 
been reduced to almost the vanishing 
point since the institution of tubercu¬ 
lin tests for cattle. In other countries, 
where the control of tuberculous 
cattle has not been so efficient, the 
disease continues at a high rate. 

Although pulmonary tuberculosis 
is the most common form, the 
glands, covering of the brain (me¬ 
ningeal tuberculosis), the spinal 
iuid, the eye, and many other tissues 
may be affected. In acute miliary 
tuberculosis of the generalized type, 
the tubercle bacilli may be dissemi¬ 
nated throughout the organs of the 
body. Acute active pulmonary tu¬ 
berculosis, ‘‘galloping consumption,” 
may be difficult to diagnose at the 
onset. It may attack suddenly, with 
cougMng of blood-stained sputum, 
and in such cases a doctor should be 
promptly consulted. This form, wMch 
was once rapidly fatal, has now 
yielded to modem drugs. Tubercu¬ 
losis of the abdominal region, affect¬ 
ing the intestines and other organs, is 
rare in the United States. One of the 
most distressing forms, known as 
Pott’s disease, after the British phy¬ 
sician who first described it, causes 
crippling and curvature of the spine. 
A person may have tuberculosis of 
the lung and some other form of the 
disease at the same time. 


The cough is the best-known symp¬ 
tom of tuberculosis, and is an indi¬ 
cation of infection of the tung by 
the tubercle bacillus or by some other 
germ. Any cough that persists for 
three or four weeks should alwajs be 
brought to the aitenlion of a physi¬ 
cian. The cough is frequently ac¬ 
companied by expectoration, and in 
some cases enough destruction of 
lung tissue has occuricd lor blood to 
be expectorated. Turfheimore, fluid 
may pour out into the walls of the 
chest, an example of the way the 
body attempts to control infectiori. 
Another way the body tries to check 
the infection is to cover i)T wall off 
the infection with scar tissue, a proc¬ 
ess known as fibrosis. 

The tuberculous person is gener¬ 
ally sick, loses w’eighl, and feels weak. 
A slight rise of temperature in the 
afternoon, or fever and an increase 
in the pulse rate, may also appear, 
and night sweats are common, 

X-ray examination will reveal the 
extent of involvcmenl of the lung, 
and a physical e\aminatit>n of the 
chest deteimines any clianges that 
have taken place in its shape or con¬ 
tour and movement By placing his 
hands on the chest, the docti^r can 
determine the presence of spasms of 
the muscles or vibrations associated 
with the passing of air info or out 
of the lung. Tlie doctor will also 
thump the chest ami note whether 
the sound is dull, hm increased res¬ 
onance or a tympanic response. 
Sounds made by the air passing into 
the lung, as heard through a stetho¬ 
scope, mdicale any interference with 
the passage of air, the presence of 
fluid or solid tissue, or other changes. 




TUBERCULOSIS 


TUBERCULOSIS 


The spulum is examined to deter¬ 
mine the presence of the tubercle 
germs, which conclusively point to 
tuberculosis. Ihe absence of bac¬ 
teriological evitience does not, how¬ 
ever, exclude the disease, because in 
the earlier stages of the intcction the 
germs may be absent in as many as 
35 per cent ol ca.scs. 

The siiccess of the treatment de¬ 
pends largely on recognition of the 
disease at the earliest possible mo¬ 
ment. 

Once the doctor has determined 
the extent of the tuberculosis, the 
age of the infection, the portions of 
tissue involved, and other significant 
factors, he decides the course of man¬ 
agement to be taken, not only medi¬ 
cally but also personally with the 
patient. An understanding and 
healthy attitude on the part of the 
patient tow'ard the disease may be a 
large contributing factor in the ef¬ 
fectiveness of the treatment. 

Social and economic problems 
arise in many fiunilics when some 
member develops tuberculo.sis, and 
social service departments in hos¬ 
pitals are often of great help in han¬ 
dling them. From a medical point of 
view, the principle of rest treatment 
require.s as far as possible freedom 
from anxiety and worry, and by 
helping to alleviate these, the social 
service departments can help the 
physical state of the patient. 

Once the diagnosis is established, 
almost without exception every case 
of pulmonary tuberculosis is treated 
with appropriate drugs for at least 
twelve months, and usually from 
eighteen to twenty-four months. 
Combinations of streptomycin, iso- 


niazid, and para-amino-salicylic acid 
are prescribed in most cases. Bed 
rest of the sanatorium type is recom¬ 
mended at the onset of treatment in 
almost every case of active pulmo¬ 
nary tuberculosis, followed by a 
semiambulatory stage, and then an 
ambulatory period of limi ted ac¬ 
tivity. 

Although it was once believed that 
a high cool dry climate was most 
conducive for curing tuberculosis, 
it has now been established that the 
disease can be treated in any climate. 
The attention of a competent physi¬ 
cian, the services of a good hospital 
or sanatorium, sufficient rest, good 
food, and administration of anti¬ 
tuberculous drugs and other factors 
are primarily significant. 

Because of the effectiveness of 
prolonged drug therapy, a combina¬ 
tion of home and hospital treatment 
is recommended whenever possible. 
The American Trudeau Society has 
issued the following summary: ‘The 
management of tuberculosis today is 
a complex matter requiring the con¬ 
tinuous supervision of a well-trained 
physician or physicians; the use of 
complicated laboratory facilities for 
proper evaluation; and long term, un¬ 
interrupted use of appropriate anti¬ 
tuberculous drugs; the availability of 
competent thoracic surgery in many 
cases; the opportunity for good nurs¬ 
ing care and effective long-term phys¬ 
ical rest and emotional relaxation; 
the availability of patient education 
and the proper proportion of recrea¬ 
tion, occupational therapy and medi¬ 
cal social service; and the proper 
facilities for isolation. It is concluded 


731 



TULAREMIA 


TULAREMIA 


that in the majority of cases this 
service and treatment can best be 
offered in a hospital, during at least 
the acute phases of tuberculosis, and 
for the latter phases as well unless 
adequately supervised home care is 
available.” 

Reports indicate that good results 
are being obtained in those com¬ 
munities where the program of hos¬ 
pital and supervised home care is 
coordinated. Treatment is begun in 
the hospital and continued through 
the acute period, usually until cavities 
are closed, the sputum is negative, 
and the course of the disease is 
predictable. Then an appropriate 
supervised program of home care 
with continued drug treatment is 
established. 

The employment of artificial 
pneumothorax for collapse of the 
lung has been almost completely 
abandoned, because of the high in¬ 
cidence of serious complications. 
However, when it is necessary to 
collapse the lung to rest it, thoraco¬ 
plasty, an operation on the chest 
wall in which portions of the ribs 
are removed, remains an effective 
procedure. 

The use of isoniazid to treat acute 
miliary tuberculosis and tuberculous 
meningitis has brought about a spec¬ 
tacular reduction in fatalities, and in 
some groups the survival is as high 
as 80 to 100 per cent. In general, 
tuberculosis affecting parts of the 
body other than the lung is treated 
with the same drugs as pulmonary 
tuberculosis. 

The extensive knowledge of tuber¬ 
culosis now available makes its com¬ 


plete prevention an ultimate possi¬ 
bility. RemoN'a! of those conditions 
which lower resistance and make the 
body more susceptible to tuberculous 
infection, such as siuin aieas where 
health and hygienic standards are 
low, can greatly deciease the inci¬ 
dence of tuberculosis. A more im¬ 
mediate measure is the <.ietection of 
tuberculosis through periodic x-ray 
examination of the chest. Fscry per¬ 
son should have an x-iay examina¬ 
tion of his chest and a general physi¬ 
cal examination once a year. Active 
ca.ses must be isolated, and persons 
who have been exposed should he 
particularly watchful. Anyone who 
has symptoms of tuberculosis—loss 
of weight and appetite, nausea, per¬ 
sistent fever, persistent cough and 
expectoration, a prolonged cold or 
spitting ot blood—-should immedi¬ 
ately con.sult a doctor. 

TULAREMIA. an infectious tlisc.isc 
transmitted to man by infected rab¬ 
bits or other rodents, through their 
bite or through handling them. 

An Arizona phy.sician. Dr. Ancil 
Martin, first observed the inlection in 
1907 and traced it to the skinning 
and dressing of wild rabbits. In IhU), 
wild game in Tulare County in Cali¬ 
fornia were dying by the thousands; 
two investigators from the U. S. 
Public Health Service isolated the 
germ causing the disea-se, which came 
to be called tularemia, deriving its 
name from Tulare County. The medi¬ 
cal director of the U. S. Public Health 
Service, Dr. Edward Francis, made 
further studies auad discovered that 
human beings contracted the dis- 


732 



TUMOR 


TUMOR 


ease from contact with diseased rab¬ 
bits and, in some rare instances, from 
bites of ticks and flies. 

By far the most common source of 
infection is contact with the hands 
with the diseased rabbit. Rabbit meat, 
thoroughly cooked, is harmless when 
eaten, since a temperture of 130° F. 
will kill the germ of tularemia. 

When tularemia appears on the 
body, an ulcerlike sore is usually 
found at the point where the germs 
have entered through the skin. This 
sore ordinarily appears several days 
after exposure. Following rapidly are 
headache, aching muscles and joints, 
weakness, chills, and fever. 

The wild rabbit is the animal 
chiefly infected by tularemia, but the 
infection has been found in almost 
every type of small wild animal, in¬ 
cluding the muskrat, opposum, water 
rat, and squirrel. Cats and sheep 
have also been known to be infected. 

Persons who handle rabbits for 
any purpose should wear protective 
rubber gloves. If they do not, they 
should wash their hands in a mild 
antiseptic before and after handling 
the rabbit. Contact of the rabbit 
flesh with a scratch, cut, hangnail, or 
sore should be carefully avoided, and 
the wrapping paper which has con¬ 
tained the animal burned. If any 
evidence of swelling or secondary in¬ 
fection around a cut or sore appears, 
a doctor should be seen promptly. 

For those who hunt rabbits, it is 
well to remember that a rabbit which 
runs slowly is probably a sick rab¬ 
bit and best ignored. Any rabbit 
which a child or dog biin^ home is 
likely to have been too sick to run. 


In treatment of tularemia, strepto¬ 
mycin is rapidly curative, and other 
antibiotics including aureomycin, 
Chloromycetin, and terramycin, have 
been used effectively. Complications, 
including pneumonia, may arise and 
require hospitalization, intravenous 
feeding, and, for serious cases, blood 
transfusions and oxygen. 

TUMOR, literally a lump or swelling, 
although the term is not used to de¬ 
scribe the swelling of normal tissues 
such as occurs in inflammation or 
edema, or the enlargement of organs 
such as the spleen, liver, or kidneys. 
Specifically a tumor is a mass of 
cells, resembling ordinary tissue, 
which develops independently as new 
growth and serves no useful function. 
When such newly formed tissue oc¬ 
curs in blood vessels, it is called an 
angioma; in fatty tissue, a lipoma or 
fatty tumor; in cartilage, a chon¬ 
droma. Tumors composed of tissue 
unlike the host organ may sometimes 
occur, such as cartilaginous or fatty 
tumors which develop in a gland— 
for example, the carotid gland. A 
malignant tumor, or sarcoma, is com¬ 
posed of fleshy mass derived from 
connective tissue. 

A large class of tumors do not 
have harmful effects, except as they 
produce pressure by their growth, 
and are designated as simple, benign, 
or innocent. However, a malignant 
tumor not only exerts pressure on 
adjoining tissue but actually invades 
and destroys it, or may disintegrate 
and produce new tumors in other 
parts of the body, a condition known 
as metastasis. 


733 



TYPHOID FEVER 


TfPHOlD FEVER 


Any lump or swelling should be 
brought to the attention of a doctor 
who will diagnose it and determine 
the necessary treatment. Some tumors 
may be left undisturbed, whereas 
others should be removed. See also 
cancer; chondroma; lipoma; 
metastasis; polyp; sarcoma; 

XANTHOMA. 

TYPHOID FEVER, an acute infec¬ 
tion caused by the typhoid bacillus. 
As late as 1900, typhoid fever was 
among the most serious of diseases 
and responsible for numerous deaths 
each year. Today, although occa¬ 
sional cases still occur, the disease 
has been practically eliminated and 
deaths average around 200 a year 
throughout the United States. 

The germ is found in the blood of 
a person seriously ill with typhoid 
fever, and in 80 per cent of the cases 
is also found in the material excreted 
by the bowels. The germ of typhoid 
fever is spread through excretions of 
the body, by contaminated food, 
clothing, water, and milk. In spite of 
improved sanitation, methods of 
treatment, and immunization by vac¬ 
cination, a primary menace remains, 
the typhoid carrier, a person who 
has had the disease and recovered 
but who continues to propagate the 
germs and to spread them. Adminis¬ 
tration of penicillin and removal of 
the gallbladder of the carrier have 
helped curb the problem, but many 
typhoid carriers still exist. 

Typhoid fever follows a long and 
serious course. From three to twenty- 
one days after the infection, which 
is known as the incubation period. 


the germs develop in the body and 
liberate their poisons. Typhoid fevei 
begins with the usual symptoms of 
intection, such as headache, pains 
throughout the body, a feeling of ex¬ 
haustion, and chills and fever. Fre¬ 
quently nosebleed occurs and almost 
invariably there is .simultaneously a 
serious disturbance oi tlic bowels, 
due to the fad that the tjphoid germs 
produce ulcers in the bowels. .As the 
disease progresses, the infected per¬ 
son becomes more and more ill. (''lots 
may form in the blood vessels and 
rose spots appear on the skin at the 
end of the first week or beginiung of 
the second. Because of the damage to 
the bowels, gas forms, causing bloat¬ 
ing, and sometimes perforation of 
the intestines vshich may produce se¬ 
vere hemorrhage. Occasionally the 
infection also attacks the nervous sys¬ 
tem, resulting in not only pain hut 
even delirium. 

The doctor in c.xamining the pa¬ 
tient with typhoid fever makes his 
diagnosis on the basis ot the history 
of the case, the nature of the symp¬ 
toms, and hy careful study of the 
blood. The ‘'A'idal test of the blood 
determines, with reasonable certainty, 
the presence of typhoid fever. 

Isolation of typhoid fever patient.s 
and good nursing care by an experi¬ 
enced nurse are required. If the ill¬ 
ness occurs during the summer when 
flies are common the sickroom should 
be screened. The most effective anti¬ 
microbial treatment is Chlorampheni¬ 
col or Chloromycetin, which has in¬ 
duced earlier remission of symptoms 
and shortened the duration of the 
illness. Stools and urine of the patient 


734 



TYPHUS FEVER 


TYPHUS FEVER 


should be disinfected with cresol, 
iormaldehyde, or similar disinfect¬ 
ants. The patienfs bed linen and 
dishes should be sterilized. He must 
he bathed at least once a day, be 
kept clean, and the mouth rinsed 
after eating to prevent secondary in¬ 
fection. Only a few restrictions in 
diet are necessary. Nourishing bland 
foods arc given during the early 
part of the illness, but during con¬ 
valescence a high-protein, high-calo- 
rie diet, containing from 3,000 to 
3,500 calories, is recommended. 

Typhoid vaccine is highly effec¬ 
tive, but not absolutely preventive 
against typhoid fever. It is adminis¬ 
tered subcutaneously in three weekly 
doses by a physician or trained nurse. 
A booster injection at suitable inter¬ 
vals will maintain a high level of 
immunity and should be given to 
persons who because of occupation 
or travel may be exposed to typhoid- 
contaminated food or water* 

Although areas still exist through¬ 
out the world where typhoid fever is 
a threat, persistent attention to water 
supplies, pasteurization of milk, dis¬ 
posal of sewage, control of typhoid 
fever carriers, and general education 
of the public in hygiene can elimi¬ 
nate the disease entirely. See also 
CARRIERS OF DISEASE. 

TYPHUS FEVER, a plague which 
has occurred in eastern Europe and 
Asia for centuries, is an infectious 
disease caused by a rickettsial organ¬ 
ism. Other names for it are jail fever, 
ship fever, camp fever, and louse 
typhus. It is carried by the body 
louse or rat flea and an epidemic may 


arise wherever overcrowding, fam¬ 
ine, and poverty prevail It occurs 
principally in cold weather and may 
follow in the wake of war and fam¬ 
ine, and spread in slums, concentra¬ 
tion camps, asylums, and prisons. 

T 5 ^hus fever includes three dis¬ 
eases: the epidemic louse-borne ty¬ 
phus, Brill’s disease, and murine flea- 
borne typhus. The three types differ 
from one another only in the in¬ 
tensity of the symptoms and the 
severity of the illness and fatality 
rate. 

Epidemic louse-borne typhus is 
transmitted by the body louse, chiefly 
in eastern Europe, Asia, and northern 
Africa. Cried louse feces on cloth¬ 
ing or bedding can keep active rickett¬ 
sial organisms for many months and 
be a source of contamination. 
Epidemic typhus is most frequent 
during winter and spring, when 
heavier clothing and less frequent 
bathing create ideal conditions for 
rapid multiplication of lice. 

Symptoms appear about ten days 
after a person has been bitten by an 
infected louse. Severe headache, high 
fever, and aches and pains of the 
entire body develop. On the third to 
seventh day, a rash appears, first on 
the armpits and flanks, then on the 
trunk and later on the arms and legs. 
Mental faculties are dulled and pros¬ 
tration is severe. Odor from the 
mouth is foul and bronchitis and 
pneumonia often develop. In mild 
cases recovery is usually rapid, and 
one attack establishes long immunity. 

In the past, the death rate from 
typhus epidemics was high. In the 
epidemic of eastern Europe and 

735 



TYPHUS FE¥E!? 


rYPHUS FEVER 


Hussia between 1918 and 1922 thirty 
milliOE cases occurred, with three 
million deaths. In Serbia, the mor¬ 
tality rate was between 30 and 80 per 
cent, and of some 400 doctors w’ho 
contracted the disease, 126 died. An 
Egyptian epidemic in 1943 resoited 
in 40,000 cases and 8,000 deaths. 

Brill's disease is a form of typhus 
found principally among emigrants 
from countries which have had epi¬ 
demics of the louse-borne typhus 
Though the same rickettsial organism 
is responsible for both forms ot 
typhus, Brill's disease generally oc¬ 
curs in persons who have had epi¬ 
demic t 5 phus before emigrating It 
is a milder form of typhus and 
generally is not fatal. Since the 
specific agent responsible for Brill’s 
disease has not yet been isolated, 
the means for prevention and cootiol 
have yet to be developed. Precautions 
are the same as for typhus. 

Murine typhus is a flea-borne dis¬ 
ease for which the rat is the breeding 
animal. Human beings become in¬ 
fected by the bite of an infected flea, 
or by eating food contaminated by 
flea feces or rat urine. The disease is 
not spread by man. It has occurred 
throughout the United States, but is 
most common in the Atlantic and 


Gult st.Ucs 

The ini.iif)ation puuHi hont 
Iwehe da\s, and tie irt 

siniiLir to those of tpidLfniv. Ophus 
but die milder and of riioitu cliFa- 
tion The ra^^h is Ics^ e\!i.ns!\c aiid 
fades soonei and coniphe Unwis tfi 
tewc! 

rrcatoicnl of thi t\piius kvu 
group consists oi good ninsiiie cm 
Antibiotics ha\e been dUttne in 
decreasing the sc%eiit\ ol tlu dist us 
and m controlling its spre uJ 

Prevention of Icphiis depends 
largely upon eliminaliou ot fht 
animal which bieeds the disease and 
the msec! which traiismiis it Adult 
hce aie destioyed with Di)I, and 
the eggs aie kilicii b\ steam steiili/a- 
tion During Woild War IL piemn- 
tion and control ot epidtniie t\phiis 
was one ot the gieal inedieal ac¬ 
complishments Inimiini/atioii was 
achieved bv means of saeeines gnm 
to entire companies o! men Since 
rats are the piimai} souhc ol miiiine 
typhus, prevention and control in¬ 
volves rat-proofing hiiiklrnes espe¬ 
cially granaries and stoiehoiises iind 
eliminating gaibage dumps and other 
conditions conducive to breeding r its 
See also iMMUNi/Aiicrsj, eai con¬ 
trol; EICKlITTSIAl DISf \S| S 


736 




UI.CER, any open sore, other than 
a wound, with an lEflamed base. 
Such a lesion usually occurs In the 
skm 01 raucous membrane of some 
raternal organ. Ulcers may result 
from infection, injury to the Mood 
supply, damage to nerves, or from a 
wide variety of other cuases. Ulcers 
require the attention of a physician 


who will not only endeavor to learn 
the specific cause but will plan the 
treatment accordingly. See peptic 
ULCER. 

UMBILICUS^ or navel, the depressed 
scar in the median (middle) line of 
the abdomen, which results from 
the separation of the umbilical cord 
in childbirth. 



timbiliccil Cord—The ymbiiirol cord i$ the baby's life line before birth Through it courses 
the. boby''$ blood which picks up oxygen and food in the placenta (commonily called ''the 
afterbirth') The baby depends on the mother's blood supply in the placenta for its nourish¬ 
ment and removcil of its waste products In some respects the placenta and cord can be 
compared fo the roots and stem of a plant But it must be remembered that the placenta 
acts as a membrone through which substances are exchanged The baby's and mother's 
blood never mix 



UNDESCENDED TESTES 


UREMIA 


UNDESCEMPED TESTES. The 
development of the testes, or testicles, 
takes place in the abdominal cavity. 
Normally they descend into the scro¬ 
tum soon after birth. If this descent 
fails to occur, the abnormality is 
designated as undescended testes. 

Undescended testes usually atrophy 
—that is, waste away. If this occurs 
in both testes, the person becomes 
sterile. Undescended testes through 
functional failure also hinder proper 
development of the secondary sex 
characteristics, such as the beard, the 
low voice, and the flat chest. 

The parents or pediatrician should, 
therefore, examine the child at an 
early age to be sure that the testes 
have descended into the scrotum. 
Ordinarily the testes can be felt. 
Rarely it may be possible to press 
them down gently to the proper 
position. In cases of any difficulty the 
advice of a doctor is absolutely 
essential. If the child is old enough 
to realize the situation, care should 
be taken not to arouse his curiosity 
or create anxiety. 

Sometimes surgery is necessary to 
transplant the testes to their proper 
position in the scrotum. This opera¬ 
tion should, if possible, always be 
performed before puberty. See also 

REPRODUCTION SYSTEM. 

UNDULANT FEVEE, known medi¬ 
cally as bracellosis, and in different 
sections of the world as Malta, 
Mediterranean, Rio Grande, Texas, 
and goat fever; a remittent febrile 
disease, caused by infection with 
BruceUa bacteria, named after Bruce, 
a British physician who first isolated 


it on Malta. I he in fed ion may Iasi 
weeks or months and diifiny this 
time the te\ef rises and I alls o\er 
periods oi several da\s, and may be 
severe enough to cause dcafli. Un¬ 
familiar in the Uniled States hclore 
1927, undulant fever has how been 
reported in every state. 

Undulant lever is also found in 
cattle, sheep, and goats, and humaii 
beings may contract ttie disease fu)m 
infected animals, although moie fre¬ 
quently from infected milk or milk 
products. Twelve to tliiily-six days 
after exposure, fever and other svmp- 
toms are noted. I he tcnipcrvituic liscs 
steadily over a pcrk>d of days, re¬ 
ceding temporarily each morning, 
until a fever of 102 or 103' is 
reached. It remains at this point lor a 
tew days, then steadily drops down, 
and this cycle may persist iof imuitiis. 
Fever periods are accompanied by 
general malaise, pain, constipation, 
sweating, and weakness. Undulant 
fever has occasionally been mis¬ 
taken for oilier illnesses with some¬ 
what similar symptoms, such as 
malaria, typhoid fever, and even 
tuberculosis. 

Until recently, little could he done 
for the mfection, but vaccines now 
exist which can etTecliveiv prevent if, 
and sulfonamides and antildotics arc 
helpful in some cases, and other 
measures, such as heat treatments, 
have yielded a certain amoiint of 
success. 

UREMIA, the poisoning which re¬ 
sults when the filleriag and cxcrclioii 
of wastes from the blood by the 


738 



UiETEi 


URETER 


kidneys is blocked so that these sub¬ 
stances accumulate in the blood. It 
occurs in acute and chionic forms. 
The most extreme type is when both 
kidneys are removed or their excre- 
toiy channels are blocked. Death 
then follows in a few days. 

An early symptom of uremia is 
headache, which may be present in 
annoying severity wrecks before 
other iiidicationsS of disturbance are 
perceptible. When the headache is 
accompanied by restlessness, difficulty 
in sleeping, nausea, and vomiting, the 
possibility of uremia definitely exists, 
and prompt medical attention is 
imperative. 

In its acute form, uremia may 
attack without warning. A convulsive 
epileptiform fit followed by coma 
may be the first manifestation. Some¬ 
times the coma occurs without a fit 
and in some instances mania seizes 
the patient. Inflammation of the 
kidney may occur in children during 
or after another acute infection, with 
similar sudden convulsions preceded 
perhaps by rapid swelling of the 
tissues and face. The attack may 
happen so quickly and violently that 
death ensues. Because of this, doctors 
watch carefully urine changes in 
children who have major infections 
such as pneumonia, acute tonsillitis, 
or scarlet fever* 

in the more slowly developing 
uremia, the early symptoms are fol¬ 
lowed by shortness of breath, at¬ 
tendant on accumulation of toxic 
materials in the body. It is often 
difficult to distinguish between failing 
breath due to heart weakness and 
that accompanying the later stages of 


kidney disorder. The patient may 
grow apathetic, drift quietly into un¬ 
consciousness, and finally die. Oc¬ 
casionally fluid accumulates, presses 
upon the lungs, and affects breath¬ 
ing. Similarly fluid may intrude upon 
the brain and have to be withdrawn 
by spinal puncture. 

In general, treatment of chronic 
uremia is the same as for chronic 
nephritis. Acute uremia is often re¬ 
lieved by inducing sweating and by 
frequent liquid bowel movements, 
both of which tend to help the body 
rid itself of excess fluid and liquid 
wastes. Many uremic patients, with 
obstructive lesions, are cured by 
proper treatment, which can include 
injections of glucose to correct de» 
hydration. 

Recent investigation indicates that 
uremia is probably not the result of 
accumulating urea in the blood as has 
been believed for more than a 
century. In one experiment, the 
ureters of animals were redirected to 
empty into the bowel. Some of the 
urine which would ordinarily be 
excreted by way of the urinary 
bladder entered the intestines and 
part of it was reabsorbed into the 
blood. Urea in the blood of the 
animals rose to a remarkable level 
of fifty times above normal without 
having any observable effect on them. 
A tentative conclusion from this ex¬ 
periment is that urea is not toxic 
enough to bring about the profound 
and sometimes drastic symptoms 
found in uremia. See also nepheitis. 

URETER, a thick-waUed muscular 
tube that passes the urine from the 
kidney to the bladder. There is one 

739 



URETHRA 


URiNATiON 


on either side of the pelvis. The ureter 
acts by a process of contraction or 
peristalsis that forces urine down the 
tube in spurts. It is about twelve 
inches long and about one-filth of an 
inch in diameter. 

Sometimes a stone may block the 
ureter and require surgery for its 
removal. The tube may become 
twisted or infected, and occasionally 
it has been ruptured. 

Disorders of the ureter or any part 
of the urinary tract are generally 
treated by a specialist known as a 
urologist. When the ureter is affected, 
x-rays are generally taken, after in¬ 
jection of a substance which causes 
the ureter to become visible. 

URETHRA, the passage from the 
bladder through which urine is 
voided. In the male, the urethra is 
approximately eight inches long, and 
only an inch and a half in the female. 
The male urethra begins with a 
prostatic portion which is surrounded 
by the prostate gland. It receives 
ducts through which prostatic secre¬ 
tion and semen are discharged. After 
a short second part comes the cavern¬ 
ous section which passes through the 
main body of the penis. It too re¬ 
ceives ducts, and recesses emerge 
from it. Infection of the urethra fre¬ 
quently lodges in these side passages 
and is difficult to dislodge. 

Urethritis, inflammation of the 
urethra, most frequently the result 
of gonorrhea, causes a swelling which 
narrows and partly closes the urethra. 
The inflammation impedes the flow 
of urine and the emergiag stream may 
fork or twist Sometimes the urethra 


is clogged hv a kidiK'}' stone or a 
toreign body which h.oc to be 
removed suigicai!}. 

Suicluic of the loethia icquncs 
icgultr stictk-hing v.i(h an indiumcnt 
dcaigned for the puipose, hut some¬ 
times surgical tieitmcnt may he 
needed to open the pass ige. A 
stricture of long duration cats icact 
on the kidnejs ansi uretcis and on the 
bladder too. causing it to dilate and 
enlarge abnormally. 

The uiethra may he ruptured by a 
severe blow or by an accident, caus¬ 
ing urine to escape into neajby tissues. 

The teniale uiethra is broader 
than that ol the male and is subject 
to greater dilatation. Urethral car¬ 
buncles are small swellings peculiar 
to women, and il they do not give 
any discomfort are best left un¬ 
touched. It tlun become tender and 
painful duting uiinatjon, they can be 
removed surgically. 

URINATION, technical!) termed 
micturition, the passing td urine from 
the body by the kidneys A compli¬ 
cated muscular action is involved. 
The wall ol the hiaddci and .uuvthei 
related muscle are conti acted. Ihen 
a circular muscle aionnd the neck 
ol the bladder which keeps it shut 
and holds back the urine at all 
other times is released, Ihe nervous 
regulation of urination is through a 
center in the spinal cord, nuis, even 
an uiiconsciou.s person can urinate. 
Complete interruption of urination 
will bring death in a few days. The 
spinal center, however, is controlled 
by the brain, whether during sleeping 
or waking. Three or four times 


740 



URiNE 


URINE 


a dav is a noima! interval for 
mictuiifion and ouiinarilv it is not 
necessary at night. 

Many factors may increase the fre¬ 
quency of urination—for instance, 
pregnancy, and cold weather. Since 
less moisture is lost from the skin 
during cold sseather, a greater ex¬ 
cretory load is tluown on the urinary 
ssslem. Other lactois may be excite¬ 
ment; inOammation or irritation of 
the kidney, bladder, or urinary pas¬ 
sage; or a growth or presence of a 
.stone within them. In addition, ex¬ 
cessive uime may occur in diabetes 
and nephritis, and acid or other 
irritants he present in the urine it¬ 
self. 

Diminution of the flow of urine 
occurs when the prostate gland is 
enlarged, thus causing contraction of 
the urethra, the urinary passage lead¬ 
ing to the exterior. Complete cessa¬ 
tion may be due to feebleness of the 
bladdei os to an obstruction or 
intciruption of the kidneys’ normal 
formation of urine. 

Partially or wholly uncontrolled 
urination may also arise from several 
factors. The bladder may have 
reached il.s capacity and be unable 
to hold more, or nervous disorders 
may induce or permit involuntary 
urination. Apoplectic or epileptic fits 
as well as unconsciousness may affect 
micturition, and sometimes the brain 
loses its power to regulate the special 
spinal center. 

Occasionally a sense of need to re¬ 
lease urine develops when actually 
the bladder is empty. This condition, 
dysuria, may come from irritation of 
the urinary tract or from nervous 


sources in locomotor ataxia, a dis¬ 
ease of the spinal cord. See also 
BED wetting; bladder, urinary; 

DIURESIS. 

URINE, the watery fiuid excreted 
from the blood by the kidneys, stored 
in the bladder, and discharged 
through the urethra. In health, urine 
is amber-colored and contains urea, 
inorganic salts, pigments, and other 
end-products of the metabolism of 
both protein and minerals in the 
system. Urine has a somewhat aro¬ 
matic odor and when it stands for 
some time ammonia is produced, 
which is easily recognized by its odor. 

The daily quantity of urine may 
vary in health. In cold weather it 
may be increased and conversely 
decreased in hot weather when per¬ 
spiration removes a large amount 
of waste products. The quantity is 
also affected by certain diseases. In 
diabetes, pints of urine may be ex¬ 
creted each day. In fevers and acute 
nephritis, urinary output may be 
greatly lessened. If urine has an 
ammoniacal odor when excreted, it 
has undergone decomposition, as 
occurs in chronic inflanunation of 
the bladder. In diabetes the odor may 
resemble that of new-mown hay. In 
certain diseases and disorders, it is 
essential to determine the quantity 
of both nonnal and abnormal con¬ 
stituents of urine, particularly urea. 
A diminution of urea occurs in ne¬ 
phritis and other disorders. Albumin 
in urine may be indicative of ne¬ 
phritis or another disorder, but some¬ 
times, as in albuminuria, the cause 
is physiological. In diabetes the urine 


741 



UTERUS 


UVULA 


is tested to determine the amount ot 
sugar, and another test indicates 
whether or not blood is present. 

The acidity of urine is increased 
by an ample amount of meat in the 
diet; large amounts of vegetables 
make it alkaline. In dyspepsia, when 
copious amounts of soda are taken, 
it may also be quite alkaline. 

Specific gravity is also tested in 
diabetes and in diabetes mellitus it is 
considerably raised. In diabetes in¬ 
sipidus or cirrhosis of the kidney, 
however, it is quite low. See aho 

ALBUMINURU; HEMATOMA. 

UTERUS, a hollow, pear-shaped 
organ in the female pelvis commonly 
known as the womb. Within the 
uterus, the unborn child develops 
and grows for nine months, nourished 
by the blood from the mother’s 
body. In the nonpregnant woman, 
the uterus is about three inches long, 
but during pregnancy its elastic wall 
stretches. It returns to normal size 
after delivery. The uterus is sus¬ 
pended in the pelvis by ligaments 
and opens into the vagina by means 
of the cervix, a small hollow fibrous 
tubelike structure situated at the 
bottom of the uterus. The cervix is 
a protective passage which shields 
the rest of the uterus, especially dur¬ 
ing pregnancy. At delivery it distends 
to permit expulsion of the fetus. The 
uterus is a muscular organ, but its 
lining is a soft glandular material 
known as endometrium. Bleeding at 


mcnstiualion conic'' liotn this lining. 

I he o\anes .irc nt ii (in. uterus, on 
each side, hut do not connect with 
it. Eggs lioni the o\ O', leach the 
uterus In ptssiiu* tiom the top 
through two ainihke pioitcltdns 
known <is the ! allopi in oi uteune 
lubes. 

The utcius IS prone to mlection, 
especi.illv alter childhuth or cnmm.il 
abortion. 0>-casionall\ scseie intl tm- 
mation after ahintion mis icsuU in 
permanent stciihts, because o! de 
stiuction ot the uterine lining 

Cancer of the uterus occurs most 
frequently in older women Ihc 
symptoms include bleeding, usuailv 
between periods oi .ifter menopause. 
Bleeding may occur Itom less serious 
souiccs, such as fibroid giowths in 
the uterine wall. I he iloelor can 
usually make the diagnosis by re¬ 
moving tissue from the utcius for 
examination. 1 his is done In scraping 
the lining ot the uterus. In this 
procedure sometimes referred to as 
“D and C,” the cetsiv ts dilated and 
the uterus scraped or cuieftcd. See 
aho CANT! r; c i hvi\; as sii iii c- 
TOMY. 

URTICARIA. imtsi. 

UVULA, the small fleshy conical 
ma,ss which hang.s from the niidtile 
of the soft palate in the rear of the 
mouth. It seldom becomes infected or 
disturbed. 


742 




VACCIMATION, inoculatioa with a 
preparation containing disease germs 
or viruses for prevention of ailments 
caused by these organisms. 

When the germs are grown from 
secretions or blood taken from a 
patient^ so that it contains the strain 
of oiganisms responsible for the dis¬ 
ease, the vaccine is called autogenous. 
Usually a vaccine contains killed 
germs, but sometimes living organ¬ 
isms are used, or a mixed vaccine 
of a variety of germs or viruses. A 
vaccine contaiRing several strains of 
the influenza virus is used to prevent 

V«€€iiioti0#i—Immunity to cerfoin diseases 
may be produced by vaccination. A weak¬ 
ened virvs which will not produce the 
severe dsseose is mfected. The child actually 
develops a sHaht case of the disease but he 
will recover and for a number of years be 
immune to the diseme for which he was in¬ 
oculated Vaccinations are done on the up¬ 
per arm or thigh because these areas are 
relatively free of friction by clothing. Some 
of the communicable diseases can b^ pre¬ 
vented by V0ccinaf}on. The youngster in the 
photograph is being vaccinaled against 
smallpox, a highly communicable disease. 


epidemic influenza. The Salk vaccine, 
which has been widely and effectively 
employed in immunization for polio¬ 
myelitis, is an example of a killed 
virus. See also immunization; vi¬ 
ruses. 



743 



VAGINA 


VARICOSE VEINS 


VAGINAj the female genital pas¬ 
sage or canal which extends from the 
outer sex organs^ or volva, to the 
uterus* It consists of muscular tissue 
which is highly elastic. Inflammation 
of the vagina occurs in certain 
venereal infections, such as gonor¬ 
rhea, or it may he a complication of 
some other infectious disease, such 
as scarlet fever or measles. Vaginal 
discharge is commonly known as 
leukorrhea or the whites. Vaginismus 
is a painful spasmodic contraction 
of the muscles at the entrance to the 
vagina. See also douche; fistula; 

LEUCORRHEA. 

VAMCOSE VEINS, veins which be¬ 
come dilated so that they project in 
lumpy fashion above the surface of 
the skin. They are caused by a break¬ 
down of the valves which ordinarily 
serve to maintain a continuous flow 
of blood to the heart. These valves 
cease to function properly, and the 
blood tends to accumulate at inter¬ 


vals, causing the appeal aiice de¬ 
scribed. 

Varicose veins appear most he- 
quently in the legs, for in this area 
the blood is required to climb almost 
straight up on its way to the heart. 
For the same reason, vaiicose ^cins, 
or hemorrhoids, often develop in the 
lower part of the bowels. 

People who suffer most frequently 
from varicose veins are those whose 
blood, for some reason, is failing to 
circulate in a normal manner. Fm 
people are susceptible and also preg¬ 
nant women. After the birth of a 
child, the interference with normal 
circulation may terminate. By Chat 
time, however, the valves have been 
broken, and once broken do not re¬ 
pair themselves. 

Varicose veins are dangerous be¬ 
cause dilation leads to clotting of the 
blood and therefore to secondary in¬ 
fection. 

Occasionally varicosity of the veins 



¥aricose Veiits-Vems which have bsf Iheir elasticity become eniorged end iwolleri, The 
weakened^ walls of the veins cannot withstand the pressure of the blood. The condition is 
called^ varicose veins. Varicose veins develop in the legs of reicidle-aged people, but the 
condition may appear In young pregnant women. Sometimes the skin over fhe veins «!§. 
velops an ulcer. The photographs show the healing process of on ulcer under Ireoftnenl for 
about five weeks. 


VEINS 


VENTILATION 


cart he pi evented by proper attention 
to clothing. The habitual wearing of 
tight belts or tight garters, for ex¬ 
ample. should be avoided. 

the tieatment varies with the 
patient. SitkiII varicose veins are 
soiiictinies emptied of blood and then 
filled with a iliiid w^hich causes the 
walls ot the vein to grow together, 
in tceating the legs, the physician may 
bliK-k oft a large vessel in the upper 
part of the thigh, and so prevent the 
downward How of blood into veins 
which might otherwise become di¬ 
lated. In some cases this condition 
can be ccmfrolled by the wearing of 
elastic bandages or stockings. 

1 he ciirrcnt treatment of varicose 
\cins is surgical removal, by strip¬ 
ping and segmental excision. This 
has largely replaced injection in se¬ 
vere cases; mild cases are generally 
fell untreated. See also hemorrhoids. 

VEINS, vessels that return blood to 
the heart, as opposed to arteries 
which carry blood away from the 
heart. A vein has a structure like that 
ot an artery, except that the three 
coats oi a vein are thin and in¬ 
elastic as compared with those of an 
artery. Many veins, especiaMy those 
of the lower limbs, are provided with 
valves which open out when the 
blood tries to flow backward. 

The blood in veins is a dark pur¬ 
plish color, except the blood of the 
piilmonary veins which is red. It is 
purifled Mood carried from the lungs 
to the heart. All the venous blood 
from the rest of the body is poured 
into the heart through two large 
veios, the vena cava* 

Veins generally follow the same 


course as arteries and many are 
named after the arteries they accom¬ 
pany. 

A wound of the vein is ordinarily 
less dangerous than a wound of an 
artery, because the bleeding can be 
controlled more easily. However, a 
wound of one of the large veins in 
the neck or in the armpit is danger¬ 
ous not only because bleeding may 
be profuse but also because air may 
enter the vein and form an embolus, 
or obstruction. Breathlessness and dis¬ 
comfort may ensue, followed by 
death within a few seconds if the 
embolism reaches the lung. 

Varicose veins are dilated, hard¬ 
ened, and twisted. Inflammation of 
a vein that is septic, affected by gen¬ 
eral reaction of certain bacteria, or 
simple is phlebitis. See also hemor¬ 
rhoids; phlebitis; thrombosis; vari¬ 
cose veins; WOUNDS. 

VENEREAL DISEASE. See sepa¬ 
rate entries for the five venereal dis¬ 
eases, chancroid; gonorrhea; 

GRANULOMA INGUINALE; LYMPHO¬ 
GRANULOMA venereum; syphilis. 

VENTILATION refers to the circu¬ 
lation or movement of fresh air 
through rooms and other areas such 
as halls and stairwells. It is also the 
process of supplying fresh air or of 
purifying air. 

In natural ventilation, air from an 
open window, door, or other open¬ 
ing circulates throughout the rooms. 
If air is forced in or drawn out by a 
fan or similar apparatus, such as is 
used in air-conditioning and heating 
systems, it is described as artificial 
ventilation. 

Good ventilation involves keeping 

745 



VEiMlFOtM APPENDIX 


VERTIGO 


the air free from dust, smoke, odors, 
and gases. Under normal circum¬ 
stances, correct use o£ doors or win¬ 
dows provides a good supply of fresh 
air. Proper heating and provision of 
sufficient moisture in the air should 
be considered. A comfortable house 
temperature varies in summer from 
70® to 85® F. and in winter from 
68° to 70,° with sufficient moisture in 
the air to produce a relative hu¬ 
midity of 30 to 60 per cent. 

Investigations which studied the 
relationship between ventilation and 
occurrence of the common cold 
among school children revealed that 
colds were less frequent in naturally 
ventilated rooms than in those arti¬ 
ficially ventilated. Of course, it is 
not possible to naturally ventilate 
many places, such as theaters and 
large office buildings; and for the 
person who suffers from hay fever, 
air conditioning has the advantage 
of keeping the air free of spores and 
dust. 

YEEMIFORM APPENDIX. Vcmii- 
form means worm-shaped, and vermi¬ 
form appendix designates the worm¬ 
shaped tube or sac extending from 
the cecum. The vermiform appendix 
is commonly referred to simply as 
appendix. See also appendicitis. 

VERTEBRA, one of a number of 
small movable bones which make up 
the spinal column or backbone. 
Each vertebra is an irregular bone, 
the parts of which are: the body, the 
neural arch through which runs the 
spinal cord; the spinous process, 
which is the tip that can be seen or 
felt by ninniiig a finger up and down 


the spine; and the i iter d riojectioiiN 

or transverse pr4K‘esscs. pio- 

vide attachment porifs for* ihe lila¬ 
ments and muscles ol hack. 

The \ertcbrac ha\e difleient func¬ 
tions and are dcscid'cd accordiuy U) 
location. Ihe se\et» cervicil \erie- 
brae constitute tlic neck: the fnel\c 
thoracic vertebrae form the chest 
region; and the five mm able hiiiibar 
vertebrae are found in the fruddlc 
of the lower back, i’be sacrum com 
tains five vertebrae, fused togcllicr, 
and the coccyx consists of tour verte* 
brae united as one f)one at the end 
of the spine. 

The vertebral joints lia\e cartiLuje 
on their adjoining siirlaces; and an 
intervertebral disc, compi^^s'd also oi 
plates of cartilage, lies between cacti 
of two movable vcrietirac. 

Various disorders invi)!\c the verte¬ 
brae and vertebral discs. Mechanical 
imperfections may affect the Siicriim 
and the fifth lumbar vertebra. At the 
Joining site, the nerv’cs may become 
the seat of low back pain. SpondjUv- 
iisthesis, also known as svavback, 
affects the stability of llic Umer spine, 
and a slipped disc or in|ury nia\ 
affect the intervertebra! disc, also 
causing low back pain. Fractures O! 
protrusions may alsO' acciir in ctuanec- 
tion with interv^ertebral discs. TuIkt- 
culosis of the spine or calcification 
can implicate or even destroy the 
discs. See also disc; siiinui) ruse; 
SPINAL cord; spinf; spondylci- 

LISTOKSIS. 

VERTIGO. When a person has Ihe 
sensation that Ihe outside world is 
revolving around liifii, or that he k 


746 




VINCENTES ANGINA 


VIRUSES 


nio\iiig in space, he has vertigo. 
There are various causes for vertigo. 
For e\anip!c% a common type occurs 
wlien a person looks down from a 
hcigfU or up at a height. Other types 
are epileptic vertigo and intestinal 
vertigo. Vertigo is not the same as 
diz/iiiess or giddiness, which desig¬ 
nates a feeling of disturbed relation 
to the sumnindings. 

VfNCEN'^r^S ANGINA, variously 
known as trench mouth, Borrelia, 
and ulcerative stomatitis, m infec- 
fioii of the mouth and throat due to 
a peculiar spiral organism. It was 
tiisl dcscrif)cd in 1898 by Jean H. 
Vincent, a French physician, and 
since then the germ has been known 
as Vincent’s organism. Apparently 
the infection is found only in man. 
Infants or adults who have lost their 
teeth are seklom atTected, 

in Vincents angina, sores or ul¬ 
cers occur on the lining of the cheeks 
and gums, sometimes also on the ton¬ 
sils and in the back of the throat 
Ihe ulcers may become so large as 
to ificapacICatc the infected person. 
A typical unpleasant mouth odor 
accompanies the ailment. While the 
iliseasc often begins with local symp¬ 
toms, headache and a general feeling 
of illness may also be present. Pain 
in swallowing, membrane in the 
mouth and in the feroat are char¬ 
acteristic. Because of this membrane, 
the disease was once often mistaken 
for diphtheria* 

Viaceafs angina is easily spread 
to other persons through kissing and 
through contaminated articles such 
as towels and eating utensils. Cases 


have been reported in which it has 
been spread by improperly sterilized 
dental instraments. An Infected child 
should not go to school until he is 
cured, although isolation in the home 
is not necessary. 

Prevention of Vincenf s angina de¬ 
mands constant watchfulness of the 
condition of the mouth, teeth, and 
gums. Persistent bleeding of the 
gums, the appearance of an unpleas¬ 
ant odor, or occurrence of ulcers in 
the mouth demands consultation with 
a dentist or physician. Control of the 
infection is much easier in the early 
stages than later when the condition 
has become chronic. 

Poor teeth and negligence of mouth 
hygiene are the prime causes of Vin¬ 
cent’s angina. Conditions such as 
scurvy, diabetes, lead or bismuth 
poisoning, and syphilis may produce 
ulcers and damage to the mouth and 
gums, with Vincent’s angina as a 
secondary condition. 

The infection is treated according 
to the symptoms. Crystalline peni¬ 
cillin has proved beneficial, and solu¬ 
tions of hydrogen peroxide or per¬ 
borate of soda are soothing as a 
mouthwash and of aid in destroying 
the Vincent’s organism. In some in¬ 
stances, injections of arsenical prepa¬ 
rations directly into the veins are 
beneficial. Care, however, is impera¬ 
tive, because of danger of chemical 
bums of the tender gums and lining 
of the cheeks. 

VMUSESs the smallest and most elu¬ 
sive of the infectious agents, have 
been established as causative of more 
than fifty different infectious dis- 


747 



VliUSES 


VIRUSES 


eases of man. Al! forms of life may 
be affected by vires infection—ani¬ 
mals, plants, birds, and insects, and 
even bacteria, are subject to injury 
and disintegration by viruses, known 
as bacteiiopliages^ 

Viruses are so infinitesimally small 
that they can pass througli porcelain 
filters wMch hold back ordinary bac¬ 
teria, though the larger viruses pass 
through with difficulty. Most of them 
can be seen only through a powerful 
electron microscope. Viruses are com¬ 
posed of tiny particles and differ 
from each other in total size, struc¬ 
ture, and stability, from the smallest 
organism,, responsible for foot-and- 
mouth disease and poliomyelitis, to 
the largest, which causes parrot in¬ 
fection or psittacosis and which can 
be seen with an ordinary microscope 
to resemble the larger bacteria. The 
shapes vary from the spherical head 
and long tail of the bacteriophage 
to the sphere of the influenza virus 
and the cube of the smallpox virus. 

Viruses thrive in the presence of 
living cells, becoming an intimate 
part of living body tissues which 
they damage, and are parasites, com¬ 
pletely dependent for their existence 
upon this close intracellular associa¬ 
tion. They multiply only in young 
susceptible living cells and cannot be 
grown in artificial media unless living 
cells are present. This has made it 
difficult to study theh growth habits, 
or to prepare vaccines for preventive 
treatment. 

Each virus shows its specific type 
of action only upon certain tissues. 

For example, the virus of rabies does 
not become active in the body until 


it reaches the tissues t>t the ncr\es 
and brain. Diffecent viiiiscs which at¬ 
tack the human hods aic clisvitied 
according to the paat oi tlie hods lor 
which they have an atliiiiu. Deima- 
tropic viruses aifcct the skin; pneii- 
motropic viruses iiivu!\e the liiniis; 
neurotropic \iriises attack nen oiis tis¬ 
sue; and visccrotrt>pic \ inives harm 
the internal organs cu* \iscera. Among 
the moic familiar diseases caused by 
viruses are the common coid, mea¬ 
sles, German measles, chickenpox, 
mumps, rabies, poltonnehtis, influ¬ 
enza, encephaiitis, smallpox, and yel¬ 
low fever. A niimhcr ol other ail¬ 
ments, among them the so-callcd 
“virus pocumoniad’ glandular fever, 
and epidemic nausea and vomiting, 
have also been attributcif to viral in¬ 
fections. 

Virus diseases are conveyed in a 
variety of ways. Ihe common cold, 
measles, smallpox, chickenpox, and 
influenza are probably transmitted 
by direct contact, as well as by air¬ 
borne droplets of nasal and salivary 
secretions. Rabies is carried through 
the bite or wound produced by an 
infected animal. Mosquitoes, fleas, 
ticks, and other insects are carriers, 
as in yellow fever and in some of the 
encephalitic infections. Rarely have 
viral infections been spread by con¬ 
taminated water or food^ although 
transmission of infectit>iis hepatitis 
has been traced to wafer, as well m 
milk, in some instances. 

The fact that the vims becomes m 
intimate part of the ceils of the body 
has made treatment of viral infec¬ 
tions more difficult. Those substmees 
wMch have thus far been found 


748 






VITAMINS 


VITAMINS 


capable of destroying viras can, un¬ 
fortunately, also damage body tis¬ 
sues aod arc too toxic for practical 
use. Some of the newer antibiotics, 
such as aiireoinycin, terramycin, and 
Chloromycetin, have proved effective 
ill treatment of psittacosis and tra¬ 
choma. ITie antibiotics may have 
some value in treatment of measles, 
chickenpox, and inllueoza, if not di¬ 
rectly upon the virus, at least in com¬ 
batting any secondary invasion by 
bacteria, which often occurs in viral 
infections and aggravates the condi¬ 
tion. 

Until now, the most encouraging 
efforts to combat virus infections 
have been directed toward the 
establishment of immunity to viral 
diseases. Immunity is the ability of 
living tissue to resist and overcome 
infection. One way of acquiring im¬ 
munity to a viral disease is to have 
had that infection. Measles, chicken- 
pox, smallpox, and a few other viral 
diseases confer a lasting immunity. 
Immunity for flu, cold, and herpes 
simplex or fever blisters has not yet 
been foimd. 

Immunity may be produced arti- 
ficiiiJIy by two means. First is the 
introduction into the body of a vac¬ 
cine. This substance is composed of 
weakened viruses which have been 
submitted to a chemical or other 
process and are called attenuated 
viruses. While the virus can stfll pro¬ 
duce diseases In the body, this ability 
has been materially weakened. How¬ 
ever, the vaccine stMnulates develop¬ 
ment in the body of antibodies, a 
process known as vaccination oi; ac¬ 
tive imnfiuiiizatio'ii# and in general it 


induces a high degree of immuiiity 
and tends to be lasting^ 

The second means of producing an 
immunity is by injectioii of an im¬ 
mune serum, gamma globulin, or the 
blood serum of an immune animal or 
man. Production of immunity by this 
method is called passive immiiiiiza- 
tion because the person involved does 
not take an active part in the develop¬ 
ment of resistance to the disease, but 
rather receives into his body a sub¬ 
stance already containing the essen¬ 
tial antibodies. Passive immunity is 
temporary. 

The use of gamma globulin in 
measles, provided it is given early in 
the incubation period, has been suc¬ 
cessful in modifying the severity of 
that disease. It has also been helpful 
during the early stages of infectious 
hepatitis. In poliomyelitis, gamma 
globulin has been used in children 
in an attempt to prevent the disease 
or at least to avert the paralytic com¬ 
plications. The work of Dr, Jonas 
Salk of the University of Pittsburgh 
Medical School and his associates 
has led to the historic development 
of a polio vaccine that furnishes ac¬ 
tive immunization —that is, the vac¬ 
cine causes the body to set up its own 
defenses against the disease. This is 
the type of immunization that has 
overcome smallpox, diphtheria, and 
whooping cough. See also mfeo 
X rONS; INFECTIOUS BISEASES; im¬ 
munity; immunization; polio¬ 
myelitis; VACCINATION. 

VITAMINS^ substances which are 
found in foods in minute quantities 
and which are indispensable to the 

749 




’ll synsMmi 











FOODS AS SOURCES OF 

VITAMIN A 


Srcen.leafu an£i^ellow vemtahles are oittstaLuding sources, 
2 )airg products, eggs andlzverfancC fish liver oils) are import- 
art animal source s<, VtiajntnA^is well conserved in cooWing^ 


ConiributioTL of selected servings ofafew foods aspercentages of adult 
_ ccllawance (SOOOInternational Umis[lufj. 


Carrots — ------—~ 

Oreerzs (beets , hale, chard, __ 
mustard , spinach,turnips) 

L iver —— 

Sweet Potatoes ----—^—— 

3g u as k (Mu bbarS ~——*— 

Cod liver oil —--;-- 

{[J, S.P. II, min. standard) 

Apricots (dried] - -__ 

Peaches fgellowj ——— 

7hrz aio Juice -——*— 

Buiter(summer) —--— 

Butter (average) -—^- 

Peasf fresh] — --— - 

Prunes -—^——-—~—— 




F'V;.’'; . 


ar£E /ooooLu: 






_ 


1*1 


3^00 tm 


Grmn Beans —------—-—— 

Oleomargarine ——^^ 
(with Wiamim added] 

Egg (one) ————*— 
Cheese (American cheddarj- 



Percentage of daily requirements 
for an aditlv male. 


norma! functioning of the body. 
When they are deficient or lacking in 
the diet, or lost through cooking or 
processing, certain specific disorders, 
known as deficiency diseases, occur. 
About seventeen vitamins are known, 
and deficiencies of about half of 
diem are definitely causative of dis¬ 
ease in human beings. The seventeen 


vitamins are: vitamins A, C or ascor¬ 
bic acid, D, E, K, P, and the mem¬ 
bers of the B complex group, in¬ 
cluding Bi or thiamine, Bs or vitamin 
G or riboflavin, nicotinic acid or nia¬ 
cin, Be or pyroxidine, pantothenic 
acid, biotin, folic acid, B12, choline, 
inositol and para-aminobenzoic add. 

Vitamin A is manufactured in the 

751 


















VITAMINS 


VITAMINS 


body from carotene, which is found diet, but disturbances ol tl t luit sfrn il 
in fish liver oil, green vegetables., tract which i' li-^soip 

egg yolk, butter, and many orange- tion of vitan Iso cur c it 

or yellow-colored foods One of the as well as cone’ of pre nunev 
first signs of a vitamin A deficiency infancy, and I icfation, whe i !ht need 
is nigbt blmdness, reduced capacity for vitamin A met cases K i I'eneious 
of the eye to adapt to the dark. A serving of a \e!Um oi jneeii !c ifs 
characteristic disease of the eye, usu- vegetable cannot be includLel in tiie 
ally called xerophthalmia, results daily diet, a tc ispoon ed fish Iner oil 
from this deficiency, and a thickening instead insures an adequitc suppb 
of the skin, hyperkeratosis. Vitamin of vitamin A 

A deficiency usually occurs m per- B vitamins aie found n ilur iil> in 
sons who subsist largely on a starchy vegetables and grains, nic 4 nd milk 

FOOPSA.S SOURCES OF 

_ THIAMIKIE, (Vitam? 713 ) I 

Except forpork,common foods supply only small if* ^ e, /'v 

sources'heiTig nuiritzorzally uniTupaiT^cC cereals ancC ^ t*' f’wy 

he lost m cooking^ either through destruction hy heat orcj^t* artt m lUr 

Contribution of selected seroiuys of a few foods aspercerdages 
allowance (/ 8 mzllzgramsj 

lieast (dried brewers, 

US PM Mm Standard) 

Pork (lean)- - — - 

Bread (whole wheat) - 

Beans andpeasf dried)~ 

Corn bread - — - 

Bread (ennehed) - 

Lamb '-— ---- — 

Pkanuis ------ 

Oatmeal --—— 

Potatoes ^ --- 

Collards^kaU •““*—-- — 

24tlh~* -— -- 

Beef, veal ———^—--— 

Asparagus, cauliflower, 

Pru ssels sprouts 

Mustard greeTZs, __ 

turmp greens 

Cereal(ufhole wheat) --- 

- 

Poultry and fish ~—-— 






^ath vitamm m this group has a 
paiticular function to perform in the 
complicated metabolism of the body. 
l»art of these vitamins are destroyed 
by cooking or processing, but gener¬ 
ous portions of vegetables and grains 
m the diet provide adequate amounts. 

Thiamine or vitamin deficien¬ 
cies, beriberi, result most frequently 
from diets composed largely of refined 
or polished grain, as in the Orient. 
Beriberi is quite rare in the United 
States. 

Thiamine is also useful to correct 
and prevent the loss of appetite that 
accompanies many forms of digestive 
disorder. Frequently conditions are 


noted in which thiamine, although 
taken into the body, is not properly 
absorbed. For example, in case of 
vomiting, when the person must be 
fed by tubes, when a paralysis of the 
muscles associated with swallowing 
is present, or in the case of excessive 
alcoholism, it may be imperative to 
inject extra amounts of thiamine 
directly into the body. Other con¬ 
ditions in which extra thiamine is 
required are excessive action of the 
thyroid gland, fever, or vigorous 
muscular activities, which use more 
thiamine than is ordinarily available. 

Most symptoms of thiamine defi¬ 
ciency disappear when the vitamin in 

755 















FOODS S0DRCF3 OF 

( VitaminG) 


Mil'k IS the most important common source of riboflavin T 
not readtlp destroyed: by heat but it may be lost by extract u 
mg coohiTig and by prolonged exposure to light. 


Contribution of selected: servings of a few foods as pcrcen 
adult male allowance(21 milligrams). 


L ioer ------- 

Kaszf {dried brewer *s) -- 

Milh ----- 

Greens -- — 

Beef ----—' 

Porh- - — 

Egg (one) — ---—- 

Fish -------- 

Chichen- --—^— -— 

Bread (enriched) - 

Seans(snaf) - 

Cheese (American cheddarj- 

Cauliflower - 

Beans and peas (dried) - 

Prunes —----- 

Peanuts - 



0 30mgr 
B O 29'^y 
23 mg. 

I O 20 mg 
\o 20 mg 


I 0 n mg. | 


“ f/iot i 010 mg 


MO fomg 
I O P9 mg 

25 ^ 

Percentage of d r lu r 
form 'f‘ r- » 



pure form in combination with other 
vitamins is administered. Yeast, 
whole-grain cereals, liver and pork 
are good sources of thiamine. 

Vitamin B 2 , riboflavin, deficiencies 
are found most frequently among 
persons who live on diets largely com¬ 
posed of starches, and the deficiency 
is common in the southeastern 
United States, the West Indies, the 
Orient, and parts of Africa and India. 

Symptoms of riboflavin deficiency 
may be weakness and disturbances of 
the vision, skin, tongue, mouth, lips, 
and face. To correct the deficiency, 
foods high in riboflavin, such as liver, 

754 


egg, milk and whole-grain cereals, 
must be added to the diet. In treat¬ 
ing acute cases, pure riboflavin alone 
is seldom effective, since, as in most 
deficiency conditions, more than a 
single vitamin is lacking. 

An inadequate amount of nicotinic 
acid, or niacin, in the diet can cause 
pellagra, which occurs in most areas 
of the world, and was once the major 
form of acute vitamin deficiency in 
the United States, especially preva¬ 
lent in the South. Discovery that 
niacin is a specific in treatment of 
pellagra was a major step toward 
combatting this widespread deli- 








VITAMINS 


ViTAMifMS 


ciciic\. Xulhi liklps to correct the 
conchliiUi ind cine the suiiptoms 
winch iinohe the shin, diyesfion, and 
•icruwis s\sltnn. I ntii the discovery 
ilia! niCi'Cniic ttid could cure pel- 
layiin two tliiufs of ail piilicmts died 
iiorn flic eca\iuion. ltHia\ the death 
falc IS lose. Ill acute eases pellagra, 
the \nuain is ‘n\en in high-level 
desses. Meal, paiticularly User, whole- 
'Mail! ceicals and peanuts are good 
souices ol uiaciin 


Cobalt is a chief chemical ingredi¬ 
ent of vitamin B12, which has a 
blood-stimulating activity, similar 
to that of the anti-anemic factor of 
liver, ft is therefore especially valua¬ 
ble in treating pernicious anemia and 
sprue, as well as anemia resulting 
from its deficiency. Although inade¬ 
quate diets are occasionally responsi¬ 
ble for deficiencies of vitamin B12 
and folic acid, more often the de¬ 
ficiency is caused by some impair- 


7 7 X r xr 


FOODS AS SOURCES OF 

ASCORBIC ACID (VUam..C) 


co * fruitXi and to maiocs, many common fr^uits and 

^7 amoupJs of ascorbic acid ^especially ifeatenraw 

T V ft^stroyed by heat and it is extracted by water. 





















VITAMINS 


VITAPINS 


meet in absorption or utilization of 
the vitamin in the body. 

Other vitamins of the B complex 
group are vitamin pantothenic 
acids biotin, cholines inositol, and 
para-aminobenzoic acid. A deficiency 
of vitamin Be can cause neuritis, skin 
eruptions and sore tongue, nervous¬ 
ness and depression. It is widely 
employed in the treatment of nausea 
and vomiting in pregnant women. 

Ascorbic acid, vitamin C, the anti¬ 
scurvy vitamm, is found abundantly 


in citrus fiuits and juicls, lonialoe^s 
potatoes, and leafy vcgetahfts JIih 
vitamin is responsible lor the manu¬ 
facture by the body oi the material 
which cements teeth into position 
An infant with a vitamm C dtficicncs 
IS likely to suffer ironi ie\cr, diarihem 
loss oi weight, voniiting, and ha\e a 
generally low resistance and proh ibh 
intestinal bleeding. In childien, the 
bones be malformed Most at 
the symptoms of the deliciency du- 
appear rapidly when the \itamiii is 


FOODS AS SOUPCES OF 

IRON 


Seans, meats, the green leafy vegetables and nidr . t / 

unimpaired cereals arc t^e best common 
sources of iron 


Contribution of selected servings of a few foo a r t ^ ft 
of adult male altouanct(/Znull it ) 


Oysters —----- 

Bbojzs andpeas (cCriedJ - 

Thmip tops - 

Meat --- 

Beet greens - — 

Bread(:£jhole u/heat,4slicesJ- 

Chard '——- -* 

rate —--- 

Spinach --——- 

Bread (enriched) ---- 

Egg (one) —-- — 

Ibtatoes -—-- 

Cereal (idko le tdktat) -— 

Oatmml ---—-- 

Lettuce f leaf)— ---— 

Eaisz ns —--- 


J & mg 
. 3 S mg 
3 $ mg 


., 7 s mg 
2 0 mg 
i 6 mg 
Ming 
. 4 mg 

1 4? a mg _________ _ _ 

ZST'* SO% 7jr^ 

Percentage of daily requiremefits 
for an adult viaZe. 


















CALCIUM 


*p, 1 



^ " f # • ^ach ism the form of the orala it 

\ u \ dilated b'^thehocC;^ 


FOODS AS SODFCES OF 

PROTEIN 


A ntPzal foods are the best source of good quality protein 


Contribution of selected scrumgs of a few foods aspercentages of 
adult male allowance(10grams) 


Mi a i t and fish- 

Chif^i (i^oilage) 

Mim 

Brm d (4 si ices) •“—— 
Beam andpeas (dried) 
Ikmuis ---- 


Macaroni — -— 

Cheese (ckedd&r)— 

d^g(om) - 

Ousters (dboui fim) 
Oatmml — 


Cereatfwhole mkiatj 
Celafm dessert - 



25 % ' so% 7S% 

^Percentage of daily requireTnents 
for an adult male> 











VlTiLIGO 


VITillGO 


administered. All fresh froits and 
vegetables contain some vitamin C 
and to prevent recurrence of the 
deficiency the diet must include these 
foods. 

Vitamin D, or ergosterol, is manu¬ 
factured in the body from a conibina- 
tion of chemically related substances, 
and is essential for the formation and 
growth of bones and teeth and for 
the utilization of calcium and phos¬ 
phorus in the body. It is often called 
the sunshine vitamin because of the 
abundance supplied by the sun 
through its action on the skin, and 
the person who gets enough sunshine 
each day receives sufficient amounts 
of vitamin D. 

Vitamin D deficiency causes rickets 
in children, and in adults it results 
in improper utilization of calcium in 
the bones and produces a condition 
known as osteomalacia. These dis¬ 
orders can be corrected by adequate 
amounts of calcium and vitamin D. 
Cod liver oil, vitamin D concentrates, 
and sunshine or ultraviolet irradiation 
are effective in promoting a rapid 
improvement in rickets. Other good 
sources of vitamin D are eggs, salmon, 
and tuna fish, and milk. 

Vitamin E is found abundantly in 
wheat germ oil, and in adequate 
amounts in liver, eggs, whole-grain’ 
cereals, and lettuce. Experiments with 
animals have indicated that a de¬ 
ficiency of vitamin E may be associ¬ 
ated with sterility and miscarriages; 
however, it has not been determined 
whether or not vitamin E deficiencies 
occur in human beings. 

Vitamin K has significant anti- 
hemorrhagic properties, and defi¬ 


ciencies of it usually invoI\c llie clot¬ 
ting of blood. It is iiselifi in lieaOng 
obstructive jaundice, hemorrhage 
which results in certain intestinal dis¬ 
orders, and in hcmoirhagic conditions 
affecting newborn infants. In treating 
coronary thrombosis, \ifamin K to¬ 
gether with the drug dicumarol is also 
of value, since dicumarol affects tfie 
action of vitamin K and consequently 
the clotting of blood. Green vegeta¬ 
bles are rich in this vitamin. 

Also known as hesperediiu vitamin 
F is found in the rind ot citius tiiius. 
Whether a deficiency of vitamin P 
can exist has not yet been dctc mimed. 
The vitamin has been used in con¬ 
nection with vitamin C in cases ol 
abnormal bleeding. 

The significance of vitamins cannot 
be overemphasized, and certain basic 
foods should appear in the diet csich 
day, notably milk, meat, green leafy 
vegetables, citrus fruits, and whole- 
grain products. It the diet tuniishcs 
adequate quantities of vihimins, 
vitamin supplements are not neces¬ 
sary for the average person. A detefor 
should be consulted if any detidency 
exists. 

See also nutrition. 

VITILIGO, a pigmentary disoidcr in 
which the coloring matter disappears 
in spots from the skin. Fhese spots 
then appear white, in contrast to the 
normal coloring of the rest of the 
skin. Sometimes this condition is an 
indirect result of another disease of 
the skin, but usually it occurs with¬ 
out apparent cause. 

Vitiligo occurs coiiimotily among 
Negroes. While not generally con- 


758 



VOCAL CORDS 


VULVA 


stdercd dafi<jtToiis, it is often badly 
ini’' disease sometimes 

ii!sa.ppeais spiHitaneousIy. 

Ill about 15 per cent of the cases 
iH sifiligo, icpignientation can be in¬ 
duced li] a diii^ derived from an 
Tp^ptian plant called Ammi majus, 
to ^lilier uith ticalnieiit by exposure 
to sunliphi or artificial ultraviolet 
ia}s. Ihi^' musi he prescribed by a 
plissician. Persons v^ho have been so 
ti cated ha\e jdatively small areas of 
dcpipmeritation when the spots have 
been picseiit less than five years. 

If iSO per cent of the skin surface 
is depiemeiited, it is often practical 
til extend the condition to the entire 
hod\^ tiy treating the skin with a 
special compound. The hair and eyes 
aic not allected as in albinism. 

\TirAL CORPS. AVc lartogitis; 
I \in\t. 

VOICE BOX. See larynx. 

VOMITING, the forceful ejection of 
the contents of the stomach through 
the 010111!!. Mile possible causes are 
ifinumcratilc. Vomiting by a person 
who is seasick is probably caused by 
a disturbance in the organs of 
halince. Vomiting may be set off by 
a severe pain, such as a sharp blow 
to tlie abdomen. Psychological factors 
related to the senses may also pro¬ 
duce vomiting* such as an unpleasant 
smeil* a displeasing sight* or even an 
unkind remark. 

When vomiting is immimnt, cer¬ 
tain nerves are stimulated and a 
valve ia the lower part of the stom¬ 
ach, customarily employed to pass 
food to the bowels, is then automati¬ 
cally closed. Following this, a chain 


of waves passes through the wall 
of the stomach, moving not down¬ 
ward as usuai but upward. The person 
inhales deeply and the climax is a 
powerful contraction of both the 
diaphragm and stomach. Whatever 
happens to be in the stomach is then 
thrown through the esophagus and 
out of the mouth. Vomiting may 
happen so suddenly that some of the 
material emerges through the nose. 

While vomiting is not a disease, it 
is often a symptom of illness. If 
vomiting persists, or the matter 
ejected has traces of blood, a doctor 
should be consulted to locate and 
treat the cause. 

VULVA, the external sexual organs 
of the female. 

Inflammation of the vulva or vul¬ 
vitis may result from infection, but 
often is associated with various skin 
disorders. In children and in obese 
women, acute vulvitis results from 
uncleanliness and from constant irri¬ 
tation, It is characterized by redness, 
swelling, burning, irritation, and 
sometimes by itching which may 
spread to the surrounding areas. The 
treatment depends on the cause. 

In leukoplakia, white thickened 
areas of the skin are found, usually 
in the region of the clitoris, labia, or 
perineum. This condition may also 
be accompanied by itching. Proper 
medication is needed promptly to 
cure these conditions. 

In the rare cases of cancer of the 
vulva, leukoplakia is often the fore¬ 
runner. Early diagnosis is essential 
for a successful treatment by x-ray, 
radium, surgery, or combinations of 
these methods. 


759 



WARTS? small, usually hard growths 
on the skm. Warts seldoin produce 
any symptoms except when they are 
on the soles of the teet, in which 
case they may become painful. It 
has been found that when warts are 
picked, the blood or materia! tiom 
the wart may spread over the skin, 
causing the appearance of new warts 
by autoinoculation. 

There are many different methods 
used to treat warts including injec¬ 
tions of bismuth directly into the 
wart, destruction of the warts by 
strong chemicals, freezing with car¬ 
bon dioxide snow, electric dessica- 
tioe of the wart, and surgical re¬ 
moval if the warts are large or 
multiple in any one spot. Radium 
and x-ray treatment arc also used, 
especially when there are many 
warts around the fingernails. When 
warts appear on the scalp, it is cus¬ 
tomary to soften them first with 
various acids and then to remove 
them by electric needle or by freez¬ 


ing With caibon dunide snow i hese 
methods or matenals sfiould not he 
used except b\ those tiainci! lo flic 

technique. 

Warts on the soles i>t the led 
tend to resist tiealnienl stioneh 
Surgery is often the best inithoil 
remove them. Aflei the lio! in nuitC' 
rial has been cut awa\, caustas aie 
used on the base ot the wail lo pre 
vent legrowth. In these cases \oa\ 
IS frequentiv used as aiiiiilionai 
treatment to destroy the warl-hean 
ing area and to present tlie yiuwth 
oi new warts. Although wails haw 
been known to disappeai spontane¬ 
ously in many cases, it is no! lec- 
ommended that a person posipime 
medical treatment in Che hope that 
this will happen. 

In addition to the common waiL 
there are similar growths associated 
with venereal infections. These aie 
called venereal warts. The\ dc\c!op 
around places whiere the mucous 
membranes join the skin. The) are 



¥fASSEI!a^i^MM T£ST 


WATER 


i-M * I . (I ci^llccfioiis of 
I Wwts Because ol 

I i* ! u'i heat, moisture, 

s I hi a of hlocKl the\ 

' i’k la u intlv aiul spiead lapid- 
i’' SkLsi n 4 fs demaiul special, 
t t. itnii ill hi prc\ent then 
sp *' u’tu ^ ^ Li oljii I a?eas 

OM i ^opiA hi\s a special lonn oi 
Wifi ksUHfi as luie 'n ut These 
Iso tk lot n mompt .atenfion hc- 
V lusi onfaukki niitaiion may cause 
t''it I ■> !vi i.k\clop a malignant giowth 
ih I 1 '^ vlkf! tekfislic ot cancer It 
k ak h instances to have each 

\ III Koruniii as i! develops and to 
h Ol a vifiln! sfiitiv nuide of the 
lisMKo iindei the micioscope to 
inal.e i cit iiii that cancelous changes 
h i\c not inclined Such warts de- 
\dop nuist i>tfcn (HI the body rather 
ihui ivn the hands oi the exposed 
sKui \s lai as IS known, this type 
id loot iieviM disippeais spontane- 
oioh. 

mASSIR^IANN TEST, a test used 
tu deleiiimie whether or not a per¬ 
son has svphilis* Only a modifleatioa 
ot ihe i>iigiiia! test is bow used. The 
lest was naiiicd aticr the German 
physician August von Wassermanu. 
Vaiious modilkatioBS, such as the 
Kahn lest, the Eagle test, and the 
Hiiilon lest, are also used. 


Wtttftr-Cltarf showtng what happens to 
iQk^-n into the body. The ’kidneys han¬ 
dle the farqcsf cimouni in wofer exchange. 
HowfVf*f, o omownt of water is given 

off by Iht lungs m well m carbon dioxide. 
A smoll amoynl of water 'Is passed out in 
the feces. Wotor also is lost through the 
skin by peispiralion. 


In the test, the Mood serum aod 
sometimes the cerebrospinal fluid are 
exammedo A positive reaction in¬ 
dicates the presence of syphilis. Tests 
are also made at frequent intervals 
during the course of the disease, to 
determine its progress and the effec¬ 
tiveness of treatment. See also kahn 

TEST. 

WATER, the chemical combination 
of hydrogen and oxygen, H^O. Two- 
thirds of the weight of the body is 
water and about 75 per cent of the 
protoplasm, the material surrounding 
the nuclei of the cells. Water is 
essential to life and is found in large 
proportion in most foods. In the 
body, water transports food elements 
to the cells. It is removed from the 
body as waste by the action of the 
kidneys and the urinary system, the 



761 




WEN 


WHITE BLOOD CELLS, DISE/^SES OF 


sweat glands, the lungs, and the 
bowels. 

Insufficient production ot certain 
types of hormones in the glands re¬ 
sults in a disturbance of the distribu¬ 
tion of water and salt in the bod}?'. 
This disturbance is reflected by an 
excessi¥e loss of water in the urine, a 
condition known as diuresis, which 
results in dehydration of the body. 

Water may be a carrier of disease- 
producing bacteria, notably bacteria 
causing typhoid, cholera, and dysen¬ 
tery, When a dependable municipal 
water supply does not exist, the in¬ 
dividual must insure the purity of 
his own water. Boiling the water to 
destroy disease-producing organisms 
is often the simplest method. Aera¬ 
tion and filtering with charcoal help 
to remove undesirable tastes and 
odors. Chlorine tablets can be dis¬ 
solved in water to purify it, and home 
filter systems that utilize sand beds 
several feet thick through which the 
water passes are also effective. 

Spring water should be used only 
after the spring has been cleaned and 
the water tested for bacteria. Shallow 
wells must be walled and a good 
pumping system installed. Deep well 
water is generally pure but its source 
and purity must be tested and expert 
advice on sanitation sought. Cisterns 
should be screened against mosquitoes 
and the water boiled or purified in 
some way before it is used. Proper 
sewage disposal is always necessary 
to safeguard the purity of any water 
supply system, whether public or 
private. See also fluoridation. 

WENj a sac formed in the skin when 

762 


the sebum, the bitty mafeiiai ex¬ 
creted by the skin’s sebaceous oil 
glands, is obstructed and cxiniiot 
escape to the skin siiitacc 
Physicians cull such a sac a sehiiceous 
cyst, if not reiiio'ved, tnc iiialciial 
within the sac or cyst interacts with 
the blood and changes tri?ni a lathcr 
solid mass to one that is seniifluid, 
and may develop an oflensise odoi 

Since a wen may continue to giow 
as long as the blockage coiiliniies and 
infection does not occur, it may 
reach the size ol a golf hall or e\en 
larger. With a minimum oi siiigery 
a doctor can drain the mateiiiil iiom 
the cyst and eliminate the biockage 
which caused it. 

li, however, inicctioii iias occuncil, 
merely cutting an opening for drain¬ 
age is insufTicient. Sebaceous muttei 
will continue to he secicfcii by the 
inner wall of the sac which will 
harden, collect, and repeat the initial 
process. Removal oi the entire in¬ 
ternal wall of the c}st by surgery may 
be essential to prevent reciuience of 
an infected wen. 

WHITE BLOOD CEIJ bi ood 

HITE BLOOD CELLS, DIS¬ 
EASES OF« White blood cclK num¬ 
ber from 5,0iK) to lOgicKI pci cubic 
millimeter oi blood. White blood 
cells are not all alike, (iraiiiik»cvtes 
are the most numerous ol the mhite 
cells. They, as well as red cells, are 
produced in the marrow. L>iiiph 0 - 
cytes are produced in the spleen 
and lymph nodes of the body. White 
cells have the iiiiusual ability ot 
being able to leave and enter ihe 



WHITE BLOOD CELLS, DISEASES OF 


hU'H>J n at will. Ciranulocytes 
(( t vwi\crigcis and are able to 
Kfiiiive fxiwJena and debris or dying 
lassik Ifiwn iLiniiiged or infected 
.ifais I \ niphoc\te.s aie involved m 
ptoiiiKdioii ol antibodies. A count 
of file nuinhci of white cells indi- 
i. itt's vvhiihef this mechanism of 
defense is at work; that is, 
ni L l^e^ o! infection, Ihc white count 
Will he cie\al.ed 

/ i iikt iHiti i\ one of the most seri¬ 
ous blood disonlers Acute leukemia 
o the iiuwt lapidh fata! blood dis- 
Law inline foims of white cells 
^uddtnh are piOiluccL! which mature 
ibnoimalb. these may appear as 
ihfunnial cells in large quantities 
in the hlooil and heme marrow. 
0^c^ piodiiction of the leukemic 
cells Clouds tlic marrow and plate¬ 
lets aiKi icd cells may not be pro- 
vlikCii \!>sence ol platelets produces 
se\cie biicdmg which in turn may 
piotiuse anemia. Fail of the anemia 
is due to msulTicicnt production of 
fed cells i\eiite leukemia is more 
voinmon in chiidien than in adults. 
\lau\ driifs aie available which help 
fo eomiad this malignant disease, 
at least tor a while. Such drugs as 
the fmimone cortisone help stop the 
bleeding tendenev and may have a 
ill I eel effect oo production of leu¬ 
kemic cells. Other drugs have a 
specific effect on the marrow. These 
laCIcr drugs are quite toxic and 
iiiusi be given only under close 
supeisisioii of a patient by a hema- 
loiogist. 

The chmnic leukemias tend to 

h.ivc a much longer and milder 


course than the acute. Chronic leu¬ 
kemia almost never occurs in chil¬ 
dren. Persons with this type of leu¬ 
kemia may live fifteen to twenty 
years from the onset of symptoms, 
if given proper care. 

In either acute or chronic leu¬ 
kemia, the number of white cells 
does not indicate the severity of the 
disease. Leukemia may occur with a 
low or normal count. Severity of the 
disease is dependent on such factors 
as the degree of enlargement of the 
spleen, liver, or lymph nodes; extent 
of the anemia; or bleeding phe¬ 
nomena. Invasion of tissues by leu¬ 
kemic ceils may be the only symp¬ 
tom of the disease. Marrow exami¬ 
nation usually is necessary for 
proper diagnosis. 

Infectious mononucleosis is a be¬ 
nign disturbance usually found in 
adolescents and young adults. It 
must not be confused with leukemia. 
The disease probably is caused by 
a vims but this has not been proven. 
Epidemics in college dormitories 
and military barracks have oc¬ 
curred; the exact mode of transmis¬ 
sion, however, is unknown. The dis¬ 
ease usually starts with a sore throat 
and enlargement of lymph nodes in 
the neck. The person has some 
pain, fever, and tenderness in the 
left side of the abdomen. The latter 
symptom is due to enlargement of 
the spleen. An afflicted person fre¬ 
quently complains of being tired 
and, in fact, tires very easily. Infec¬ 
tious hepatitis may be a part of the 
picture. Specific treatment is not 
known. Measures to counteract any 


763 



WHITFlELD^S OINTMENT 


WHilFlELD^S OiNTMENT 


secondary bacterial infection may 
be taken, such as injections of anti¬ 
biotics. Bed rest and drugs to make 
a patient feel more comfortable are 
helpful. The disease may last from 
one week to many months. In al¬ 
most ail cases complete recovery oc¬ 
curs. The blood shows an increase 
in the number of lymphocytes. These 
cells differ in appearance from 
normal lymphocytes and are termed 
atypical lymphocytes. They may 
persist for many months after a per¬ 
son apparently shows no further 
symptoms. 

Lymph nodes have already been 
mentioned. These small structures 
are strategically placed throughout 
the body. Their function is two¬ 
fold: they produce the lymphocyte, 
a form of w^hite cell; and they func¬ 
tion as a filtering system for bacteria 
and tissue debris. The spleen fre¬ 
quently is called a lymph node of 
the blood. An example of the anti- 
infection activity of lymph nodes 
frequently occurs in persons with 
bacteria! infections of the throat 
and tonsils. In these persons, nodes 
in the jaw swell, producing visible 
tumor masses under the jaw. 

Malignant diseases of lymph 
nodes and the spleen are termed 
lymphomas. Not all lymphomas arc 
fatal Such diseases as Hodgkin's 
disease, lymphosarcoma, and reticu¬ 
lum cell sarcoma are included under 
the name of lymphoma. Hodgkin's 
disease has three forms. Hodgkin's 
paragranuloma is the least malig¬ 
nant of the forms and persons af¬ 
flicted with it have been known to 


live many years. Often the disctise 
docs not recur aftei surgical re¬ 
moval or x-ray trealnienl. Hodg¬ 
kin's granuloma and Hodgkmd sai- 
coma are more serious forms oi the 
disease. Much research I ms been 
done on the cause and ireatmen! 
of lymphomas and leukemias and 
great strides have been made in 
control of these diseases. Pi^opie af- 
ilicted with these cancel-like dis¬ 
orders live longei am! iiKmc 
comfortably than \uis prc\u>ush 
possible. 

Sometimes it is necessam lo ic 
move the spleem but muhs about 
this type of operation occasiinialh 
interfere with surgerv or sure. Oki 
wives’ talcs should mv! prevent sur¬ 
gery if needed. AclualK the spleen is 
an organ w'hich in mankind tioes ni>! 
seem to be nccessarv tor a normal 
life, in a wa\, it is aiiakvgouN lo the 
appendix, except that certain harm- 
less changes in the hlocu! ilo occur 
ioilowing removal ot the spleen 
In hereditary sphenvevtosis, kIko 
pathic thromboevtopenic piirpiua. 
unexplained cnlargeineni o\ the 
spleen, and certain olliei cimditions, 
removal of the .spleen ina\ be nec¬ 
essary. Families of patients should 
not he afraid of this operation be¬ 
cause of w’hat they nia\ have been 
told by unaulhoritalive persons. See 
also BtOor>; LrUK|‘MIA. 

WHITFIEWS OINTMENT, a 
widely used preparation compounded 
of salicylic and benzoic acids and 
petrolatum. The mature is useful 
as a fungicide following mechanical 


764 



WHOOPIXG COUGH 


WHOOPING COUGH 


iciDiVuti ol the nail in ringworm of 
ti'ic fijih .eid als('j in other fungiis in¬ 
fect u a i’ll the skin such as ‘‘athlete’s 
iih\L"' Whifrieiirs ointment is quite 
stinn;: ami slu)iiki be used with care, 
it slioiild not he applied to acutely 
inllaiuc'd 0\j/iog lesions of the skin, 
aiul is fscst reser\ed lor use in older, 
seal) Icsiofi'N. 

\\iICMiPi\CJ €OIJ€II. or pertussis, 
d ciiM'ase chai acieii/ed hy a convul- 
si\e a High, and inlecting the mucous 
nicinbrane ol the respiratory system. 
I he ccrueji leaves the patient out of 
hicatli and the resultant deep in- 
luiLifioii produces the whooping 
sound. 

I he disease is not a trivia! affliction 
ol childliood. Coupled with a second¬ 
ary infection, such as bronchopneu¬ 
monia, wlioiqiiiig cough can be fatal, 
especially in young children or the 
aged, I’he most frequent victims, 
fiow’cver, arc children under five. 

During the first ten days of this 
disease, the incubation period, the 
child exhibits the symptoms of an 
ordinary cold, llic cough, however, 
does not improve* The second stage 
begins with the onset of the whooping 
sound. During a coughing spell the 
face may grow scarlet while the facial 
veins swell and tears appear in the 
eyes. The cough may be followed by 
vomiting. 

Whooping cough is caused by the 
germ Hemophilus pertussis. To ascer¬ 
tain the presence of this germ, 
modern science requires the chttd to 
cough on a special culture plate on 
which the gems are then examined. 
The same test may be used as a 


proof that the child is finally free of 
the germ and no longer needs to be 
isolated. This is the primary purpose 
of the test. Diagnosis, as well as 
pronouncement of cure, may be de¬ 
termined by other means* A Mood 
test may be made, since one of the 
characteristics of whooping cough is 
an increase in the number of single¬ 
nucleus white blood cells. However, 
the whooping sound in itself is a 
fairly reliable guide for a doctor. 

The prevention of whooping cough 
primarily involves immunization 
which is now accomplished by a series 
of injections which combine im¬ 
munity against diphtheria and tetanus 
as well Only infants and children 
need to be injected. 

If a child develops whooping 
cough, isolation of the child is neces¬ 
sary, chiefly to prevent secondary in¬ 
fection in the chUd and exposure of 
other children. In some cases of 
children under two or three years of 
age, antibiotics are used, but older 
children generally recover without the 
use of drugs. If convulsions occur, as 
sometimes happens, the doctor may 
place the child in an oxygen tent and 
sedative drugs such as phenobarbital 
may be given. Treatment requires 
complete rest as weE as constant 
protection of the patient’s lungs from 
atmospheric irritants such as tobacco 
smoke or cold drafts of air. The, in¬ 
halation of steam is sometimes ad¬ 
vised, as well as certain drugs which 
relieve the severity of the cough¬ 
ing attacks. If coughing places a 
great strain on the stomach muscles, 
a rubber binder may be worn around 
that area. It is better to praise the 

765 



WILMAS TUMOR 


WORMS 


cMd for coughing less than to pity 
him for coughing niore^ Commisera- 
tioE is not the best medicine. 

Finally^ special atteiitioii should be 
given to the patient's diet^ particularly 
to that of children^ who are suscepti¬ 
ble to vomiting and therefore to 
undemourishment. Generally speak¬ 
ing, the child requires nutritious food 
which is also easy to digest. The 
best time for meals is approximately 
a quarter of an hour after a coughing 
spell. The child should eat in small 
amounts, perhaps several times a day. 
To feed him a large amount of food 
at any one time is likely to stimulate 
coughing, whereupon the food which 
has been eaten will be regurgitated. 

Starchy foods—bread, pastries, 
and potatoes—should be avoided, as 
well as any dry and crumbly foods 
which might tickle the throat and 
produce a cough. Vegetable soup is 
recommended, and also meat in small 
amounts, provided that it is carefully 
chopped or strained. Fresh fruit 
juices and plenty of plain drinking 
water are also to be given, 

WILMAS TUMOR, a malignant 
growth that affects the kidneys of 
children, usually under six years 
of age. It may grow to great size and 
cause the child's abdomen to pro¬ 
trude. Sometimes the doctor can feel 
the tumor with his fingers before 
such symptoms as pain or blood in 
the urine appear. Other symptoms are 
weakness and vomiting. 

Removal of the affected kidney 
followed by radiation is the best 
means of curing this condition. If the 
tumor is large, it may be necessary 


first to treat it with radiation, then 
follow with surgery and postopciatne 

radiation. 

WOMBs See uterus. 

WORMS, Several f^pes of worms live 
parasitically in the human body, usu¬ 
ally in some part of the digesti\e 
tract. Although the United wStates has 
relatively high sanitation and hv 
gienic standards, vaiioiis kinds oi 
worm infestation aie ctmimon in 
some areas. A stiid’v cl childicn in 
the District of Columbia, foi ev- 
ample, revealed that 35 to 65 per 
cent of certain groups had pinwoiiri 
infestation, and another study ic- 
ported that 50 to 60 per cent ol 
children in different ports ol tfic 
southern United Slates had intestinal 
worms. 

Some worms attain |■emaIlvab!e 
size, such as the beet tapev\oim which 
may reach a Jengtli of. til teen teet; 
whereas others, such as the woim 
which causes trichinosis, are so tliin 
and small that they are b.irely visible 
to the naked eye. Olten W'Orms are 
present in the bowels without causing 
any serious symptoms. Howe\ei, 
sometimes they may produce gencm! 
and far-reaching disturbances. 

Pinworm. The pioworm is easily 
the most widely distributed of worms 
which live as parasites in hufnaii 
hosts. Known also as the seat or 
threadworm, it exists only in the 
form of a human parasite. The adult 
worm, which is white, may be us 
long as half an inch down to a 
quarter of that size, Infestafion oc¬ 
curs when worm eggs are taken into 
the body. They may enter through 


766 



WOiMS 


WORMS 


the nn^ith iuvxas which have 
ed some eoniamnialcd surface, 
io in o he inhaled, foi the eggs are 
so SI I nl lieht that they can float 
ifi iOi. I corn the nioiilh the eggs 
to llie small iiitesline where they 
h U n ami In nn a, life cvcic that lakes 
Innu I'ui months. They mature in 
ths inlmdne u,nd eventually mating 
Ov Ilfs I Ir. males then leave the body 
ol ifie host, Init the lemales migrate 

10 flu lao^e ]nn\el where the eggs 
iiewlop 1 Hitilh, when the eggs are 

11 iil'\ lo be deposited tor hatching, 
thi lerii di. passes out of the body 
ihioi! hi the lower end ol the digestive 
ti aU leaMiiit hchiiul se\era[ thousand 

u on the skin surtace just outside 
the anal opennim 

I fu^ if thing 111 and around the at- 
ictual aicas is usually the most dis~ 
sviiiptimi of piiiworm infesta- 
Won In tiinales, the worms some- 
limes tia\cl the genital area. The 
e*n*s rna\ he wuich distributed in the 
hcil hcdclolhcs, pajamas, and other 
iJolliiim. When the persim scratches 
the afh'cted area, the worms get on- 
tiei the lingernmls aiui the infection 
pi Os ess heeins again. Pinworms some- 
limes hixome so tu>iiblcsome that 
ttiev atleci appetite and Urns cause 
lijss id' Weight 

ScrupuIoiLs cleanliness is absolutely 
necessaiy in the elimination of pin- 
wmm, aiiil a daily bath is essential. 
Since the eggs, the source of infec- 
Uim and reintectioii,, are distributed 
so widely and so easily^ the entire 
landiy shoutii be placed under the 
debtor's care at the same time, so that 
leinlcction docs not pass constantly 
from infected to uninfected persons. 


The drugs used against pinworm 
can be given only by a doctor^s pre¬ 
scription and under Ms care. Enemas 
with a chemical called hexylresorci- 
noi are given; a dyestuff, gentian vio¬ 
let, may be given intemaliy; and 
antiseptic ointments for affected ex¬ 
ternal areas may be prescribed by 
the doctor. The amount and manner 
of application of these remedies will 
vary with each case and must always 
be determined by the doctor. 

Roundworm, After the pinworm, 
the parasite which most frequently 
infests the human body is the giant 
intestinal roundworm, scientifically 
known as Ascaris iumbricoides. The 
female reaches a length of ten to 
fifteen inches and the male is about 
half that size. Like the pinworm, it 
lives in the digestive tract. Surveys 
have shown that around the Gulf of 
Mexico, on the south Atlantic coast, 
and through the Appalachians about 
40 per cent of the cMldren in early 
grades of school are affected, particu¬ 
larly those in mining camps and 
rural areas. In the North, the inci¬ 
dence is far less and a check made in 
Detroit, Michigan, indicated that only 
2 per cent of the cMIdren were in¬ 
fested. 

Normally the symptoms of round- 
worm infestation are not serious, ex¬ 
cept that sometimes, particularly 
when another illness is present, sensi¬ 
tivities resembling those of an allergy 
may appear. If, however, the affected 
person becomes ill enough to develop 
a fever, or if he is treated with drugs, 
the worms may migrate within the 
body to places quite remote from 
their usual habitation. They may ap- 


767 



WORMS 


pear in the nose, month, and have 
even eBwered and blocked the appcPs- 
dix, the bile duct, and the Eustachian 
tubes wiiicii coniiect the throCit and 
the inner ear. If for no other reason, 
this makes it obviously desirable to 
rid the body of these parasites. 

The worms live within the intes¬ 
tine, where in a single day the females 
produce as many as 200,000 eggs, a 
million and a half each week. Once 
outside the body of the host, these 
eggs are ready to hatch in from two 
to four weeks. On the surface of the 
ground and in moist shaded spots 
they can and do survive in this state 
for months. When the eggs are taken 
into the human body, almost always 
because of lack of simple sanitary 
precautions, they pass first to the 
small intestine where they hatch. The 
larvae burrow through the intestinal 
wall, reach tlie liver, and finally pass 
to the lungs. From the lungs they are 
coughed up into the mouth, swal¬ 
lowed again, and are returned to the 
intestines where they remain. The 
total period of development is from 
four to six weeks and the worm may 
live in the body for another six 
months. 

Although the consequences of in¬ 
festation are not parlicolarly alarm¬ 
ing, the possible secondary effects 
are such that the condition should be 
eliminated. Here again, treatment is 
strictly the responsibility of a doc¬ 
tor. Hexykesorcinol has been found 
to be especialy effective against the 
giant roundworm. The stomach is 
first emptied of its contents by purga¬ 
tion and abstinence from food for at 
least twelve houis. After the drug is 


given, i'be person rnivi nc*; ^ | 
ruioiher fi\e houi-» 4 . j ni mc, jvj unH. 
seminuid kKXis a e rccufiaixndjad. hn 
the next ^hc hiniis. A? ihv ..ml ol 
twenty-four hours, n c ilb. ul: c !•“> luKan 
to wash all residual inalersti \toin the 
bowel Ordinarily iine Ire Uuieni 
satisfactofialiy clisfH^ses ui 

Hookworm. Intcslalinii In, hook¬ 
worm, nccaior afueiicaruix prcants 
a more serious situation than Ih U ot 
the pinworm or loundv^oinn the 
hookworm does specific and suh- 
stantial damage williiii the boi.l\. In 
extreme cases it may pcrnianeiuk 
disable a person or even bring ahiHil 
death. There are sdll si/ahic aicas i>t 
the Uoited Stales wheie ii is a real 
public health problem, iH>lahl\ the 
whole coastal area iioin Noilh CAiro- 
lina through the casiern Ciiill shore 
of Texas and as far inland as pact of 
the Appalachians. 

The organism itself is about the 
size of the pin worm, a little less than 
half an inch long, and I he female is 
slightly larger than the male. I he 
most serious damage that the hook* 
worm docs is to lastcn ilsclf by ils 
teelh to the bowel wall and secrete 
a poisonous Sluid which nt ihe saine 
lime dilates the small blood ’kcsscK 
there and prevent!* coagulation of the 
blood. The worm feeds by drawing 
blood, of wWch it uses only a small 
amount for its own nourishment, 
letting the remainder pass through 
its system, relatively unaffected, and 
then out with the digestive waste ot 
the host. When the number of para¬ 
sitic worms is large, the person will 
suffer from anemia, weakness, and 
lassitude. Although his appetite may 


768 




WORWS 


WORMS 


be iiiv-'i >'>‘1 f‘*-' iiMnlh loses in- 

toK 4 lii .istntts, !us l.ise is dull 
ana in-, is ui ii.-ts rle'-s. li left un- 
Irsa.n .1- !’ie stuKiiiioji mas in time 
caii'-e iP . aluii-in! t'r esen death. 

till, utMin may base other ad- 
\e'se eJieels on tlie human body, as 
if m Iks'- ns ’.s.is horn (he stuface in- 
watki It. a toute much mote complex 
tfi.n th it sii liie luundwoim. The tc 
m.ile liouksstHiTi lass from 6,(100 to 
e<»es tiaily and these pass from 
an infested human beinci to the 
yiound. Most infested persons have 
picked up file worms by exposure to 
infected sod. I he larxae penetrate 
the skin and produce, lir.st of all, a 
scxeie local condition on tlie skin 
called -jiruimd itch.” At the point of 
enfiv, they penetrate a blood vessel 
and aie carried in the blood stream to 
the lungs. Within the lungs they 
break out in the open space, climb 
tlie hionchial tube.s to the throat and 
are sw.ilKiwctS, and eventually roach 
the small intestine where the adult 
worm finally develops. Here the fe¬ 
males begin to lay eggs and when 
these appear in the person’s excre¬ 
tions the developmental process of 
the worm is completed. The cycle 
takes about six weeks from the time 
the larviic penetrate the .skin. During 
passage through the lungs, the larvae 
may induce a bronchial inflamma- 
tton accompanied by fever. ^ 

Fortunately hookworm is easily 
diagnosed and treated. Examination 
of the patient’s bowel waste by the 
doctor will readily reveal the eggs, A 
number of remedies which will era^- 
cate the worms from the digestive 
tract, including hexylresorcinol, tet- 


rachlorethylene, and oil of chemo- 
podium, are effective. All of these 
drugs are toxic and must be adminis¬ 
tered only by a physician. 

in areas where hookworm is most 
prevalent, it is possible to avoid in¬ 
festation by taking simple precau¬ 
tions. Shoes should always be worn, 
and excrement should be disposed of 
in such a way that the larvae from 
the excreted eggs are not scattered 
about. This can easily be done by 
providing places for disposal that are 
sufficiently deep, since the larvae 
cannot climb vertically to any con¬ 
siderable height. 

Tapeworm. Of several types and 
sizes, tapeworms are among the most 
common intestinal worms which in¬ 
vade human beings. They vary in 
size from the beef tapeworm, which 
can reach a length of fifteen feet, to 
the dwarf tapeworm which never 
nneasures more than a few centi¬ 
meters. More than thirty species af¬ 
fect human beings, but only six are 
really common. 

Tapeworms are not actually single 
worms, but are in fact colonies of 
worms. The first segment serves as 
the head and other members are 
separate and hitched to each other, 
end to end. Each of these individual 
segments, called proglottids, contams 
Uttle more than the required equip¬ 
ment of sexual reproduction, smee 
feeding by absorption of predigested 
nutriment from the host eliminates 
the need for digestive apparate. 
Fertilization may be between a male 
and female element of a single pro¬ 
glottid or between one proglottid and 
the next Fertilized eggs remain 

769 



WOiMS 


WORMS 


witMn the worm and eventually the 
proglottid breaks off and is passed 
to the outside with the waste ma¬ 
terial. 

The most common way in which 
humari beings are infested by tape¬ 
worm is by eating the meat of ani¬ 
mals that have eaten either the ferti¬ 
lized eggs or a discharged proglottid, 
then incubated the eggs in their in¬ 
testine where later the tapeworm 
larvae develop and finally invade the 
muscle tissue. The same sequence of 
development may ensue with the beef 
tapeworm when cattle have been pas¬ 
tured where there is contaminated 
human excrement. If beef from such 
cattle is consumed either raw or 
partially cooked, the live worm may 
be taken into the person’s body. The 
beef tapeworm reaches fifteen feet in 
length and the numbers of its sepa¬ 
rate parts may be as many as 2,000, 
of which approximately the lower 
half will at any one time be bearers 
of fertilized eggs. 

The life history of the pork tape¬ 
worm is essentially the same, with 
some biological variations. Its maxi¬ 
mum growth is usually ten feet and 
the number of parts about 1,000. In¬ 
festation is from eating improperly 
cooked meat from hogs which have 
consumed infected human sewage. 
This type is infrequent in the United 
States but common in Mexico, parts 
of Latin America, and in some areas 
of Asia. 

The fish tapeworm, with somewhat 
more substantial differences, experi¬ 
ences the same life cycle within a 
fish as the other types. This worm 
does not release whole pregnant pro- 

770 


glottids but mature mdividuai eggs 
which discharge embryos capable of 
swimming. They enter the water 
through infected human waste. The 
embryos are eaten by water fleas and 
the water fleas by fish. The fish be¬ 
come infected and, if eaten raw, will 
transmit the infection to man. Some¬ 
times there is an intermediate stage, 
in which the infected fish is eaten by 
a larger fish which in turn becomes 
human food and transmits the infes¬ 
tation. A few areas of fish tapeworm 
infestation have been found in the 
United States, but it occurs more fre¬ 
quently in Europe. 

Dwarf tapeworms, which measure 
less than an inch, affect children more 
often than adults. Dog and rat tape¬ 
worms, while of some medical inter¬ 
est, are so rare as to be oi little 
concern to laymen. 

Several effective substances are 
available which can be used by tlie 
physician to rid the host of tape¬ 
worms. As in the other treatments, 
the person must abstain from food 
for a day or a few days while taking 
the drug. Recovery of the lop end 
of the worm from the bowel, w'aste 
usually is considered to constitute 
eliminatioii of the worms. A person 
who has a tapeworm may have o,n!y 
a few mild symptoms or he may have 
more severe attacks. The coedition 
often begins with diarrhea, which 
then alternates with constipation. 
False hunger pains are characteristic, 
although the appetite may sometimes 
dimmish. The person loses weight 
and secondary anemia appears, and 
still later symptoms may disappear 
entirely. The victim of beef tapeworm 




WOUNDS 


WOUNDS 


is likely to experience discomfort 
when the proglottids pass through 
the rectimio In every case^ the diag¬ 
nosis can be made easily and with 
certainty by examination of the ex¬ 
crement, 

WOUNDS* Any injury that breaks 
the sMEs mucous membrane, or inner 
surface of the tissues of the body is 
a wound. Although fractures and 
bruises are wounds, the term usually 
is applied to the following: 

Cut or incision^ a slash or slit in 
the skin caused by a sharp cutting 
object, such as a razor blade* This 
type of wound bleeds profusely, since 
aE the blood vessels are cleanly sev¬ 
ered. There is usually little tissue 
damage, and less danger from infec¬ 
tion than in other wounds. A deep 
cut may possibly sever tendons and 
nerves. 

Laceration or torn wound, an ir¬ 
regular tearing of the tissue by a 
rough or blunt or jagged-edged ob¬ 
ject. A laceration might result from 
a fall against an angular object or 
piece of macMnery. Bleeding is usu¬ 
ally not severe, as the blood vessels 
are irregularly tom, but danger of 
infection exists because bleeding is 
often slight and body tissues are dam¬ 
aged at the edge of the wound. 

Puncture and stab wound, caused 
by a penetrating object, such as a 
eai, bullet, or splinter. Unless a large 
blood vessel is injured, puncture 
wounds do not bleed profusely. They 
are especiaEy liable to infection, since 
they are difficult to clean. 

Abrasion, rubbing off or scraping 
of skin or mucous membrane, com¬ 


monly called *'floor bum” or “mat 
bum” although not a true bum. They 
usuaEy cover a wide surface and so 

are easily infected. 

Severe bleeding or hemorrhage and 
infection are two dangers to be con¬ 
sidered with wounds. If a wound is 
bleeding profusely, the first step is to 
attempt to control the bleeding. 
Bleeding may be from a vein, an 
artery, or both, 'V^Tien an artery is cut, 
the blood spurts out. Blood from a 
cut vein comes in a steady flow, since 
the blood is under much lower pres¬ 
sure than arterial blood. 

Venous bleeding is easier to con¬ 
trol than arterial bleeding. Pressure 
should be applied to the edges of the 
wound until a compress can be ob¬ 
tained. Usually venous bleeding can 
be stopped by placing a compress 
over the wound and bandaging it 
snugly. If necessary, hand pressure 
firmly applied directly on the com¬ 
press will help a clot to form. The 
injured area should be elevated, un¬ 
less a fracture accompanies the 
wound. 

In arterial bleeding, if someone is 
present who has knowledge of the 
pressure points of the body, this 
method of controlling hemorrhage is 
first attempted. A pressure point is 
some point between the wound and 
heart where the main artery of the 
injured area lies close to a bone; hand 
or finger pressure against the bone 
may stop bleeding, A dressing or 
other material is pressed firmly 
against the wound. If the bleeding 
stops, the dressing should be band¬ 
aged into position and left undis¬ 
turbed. 


771 



WOUNDS 


VYOUMDS 


If the firmly pressed gauze dress¬ 
ing does not stop bleedings a tourni¬ 
quet may be necessary* Since a 
tourniquet cuts off the total blood 
supply to the area, it is applied only 
when other methods fait In the ab¬ 
sence of a ready-made tourniquet, 
a rolled handkerchief j belt, or other 
substitute may be used. Anything 
which would cut the skin, such as 
wire or cord, should not be used. If 
circulation is stopped for too long, 
there is danger of gangrene, and so 
the tourniquet should never be left 
in place for more than an hour. 

In all cases of serious hemorrhage, 
the injured person should be kept 
lying down and quiet, since move¬ 
ment might disturb the blood clot. 
He should be treated for shock, which 
is nearly always present, and a doc¬ 
tor called. 

Most cases of serious infection and 


blood poisoniim dc'.clop lioni a 
seemingly insignjlkajil which 

has not been cofrccfU Uealctl. Since 
danger of inlection is pjesent an\ 
time the skin is htoken, even the 
smallest Vvound should recc!\c propci 
attention. In cases oi se\eie hkxci- 
ing, the first step is. oi ciHuse, to 
control the hemoriloan:. InttUion is 
characterized by heal, pam, swclluic, 
redness, and often pus UunialR)n. 
and if these symptoms are present in 
a wound a doctor shoiik! he canv 
suited. Minor voimds can he tieated 
with various antiseptic prepaiations. 
such as tincture of iodine, metaplien. 
merthiolate, boric acid, and iHfieis, 
and then covered v\ith a clean snug 
bandage or compress. If the wound is 
more serious, only the bandage should 
be applied and the cleansing aiui dis¬ 
infection of the uoiind diuie !iy a 
doctor, since anKUeur el!oris can 
cause serious damage. 


772 



XANTHOMA, flat yellow tumor 
which may develop on the surface oi 
the skin. Xanthomas are caused by 
fhc deposit of a fatty substance which 
the body has failed to dispose of in 
the normal manner, Most frequently 
they are seen in the vicinity of the 
eyes, especially on the inner part oi 
the lower lid. A surgeon can remove 
these ‘'yellow spots/" as they are 
sometimes called, with relative ease, 
leaving only slightly visible scarw. 
Xanthimias may tend to recur, hut 
aic seldom canccroos. See also ir- 

MOR, 

XEECIBEEMA, a disorder in which 
the skill becomes rough and dry, and 
sometimes discolored, with fine scaly 
shedding, 

XEEOFHTIIAtMIA, a ciisease in 
which a severe dryness of the eye 
occurs, resulting from a deficiency 
of vitaniin A. The cornea becomes 
clouded and iiiflameii; ulcers of the 
cornea may develop. Permanent 
blindness may result in the advanced 


stages of this disease if it is not 
promptly and properly treated. The 
administration of vitamin A is elTcc- 
live tor this condition. 

XEEOSIS, a disease in which ab¬ 
normal drymess of the skin caiiscil 
b\' vitamin A deticiency is a symp¬ 
tom. This condition may be coi- 
rected by taking Iher oi! extracts aiul 
making sure that the die! iiiciiidcs 
enough leafw green and yellow vcgc- 
fables, as W’ell as egg yolks, butter, or 
vitamin A-enriched margarine, 

XEROSTO!\lAt decreased saii\ar> 
flow; it is a symptom “^vhich arises 
from a number ot causes rather than 
a disease. In many instances it is 
temporary, us in fever or in a state o! 
tear or anxiety. Atropine, a drug of¬ 
ten administered to patients before a 
surgical operation^ may produce a 
dry feeling in the mouth. 

In chronic cases, lack o£ saliva nuo 
cause the mouth to become rough 
and dry, and painful cracks and 
fissures which Weed easily may de- 

77i 



X-Rays—This X-ray therapy unit visibly suggests its powerful two miifton volt fofc< hai 
nessed to treat the sick Although this unit is large, it is balanced as delicately as a watch 
It can be directed and positioned for best alignment for the individual patier^t being frroti*d 


velop. A stone in the duct of the 
salivary glands may cause obstruc¬ 
tion, swelling, and pain that will in¬ 
terfere with the intake of food and 
predispose the gland to inieclion. 
Surgery is the only means then o! 
removing the stones. 

X-KAYS 9 radiation produced by the 
vacuum tube, similar to light but ol 
much shorter wave length and pos¬ 
sessing special penetrating and tissue- 
ionizing power. First announced in 
December 1895 by the German 
physicist Wilhelm Konrad Roentgen, 
the x-ray has since become one ot 
the most important adjuncts in the 
practice of medicine and surgery. 

One of the chief uses of the x-ray 
continues to be for the diagnosis of 
broken bones. Today pictures are 


made from different angles so tint 
the exact relationship oi the huAcii 
bones to the tissues nia\ he di ici 

mined. 

An x-ray ot the skull shous ilu^ 
presence of disease of the bone, some¬ 
times the presence of a tumor or 
changes in the blood vessels in the 

brain. 

It is also now possible by the use oi 
accessory materials to visuali/e vari¬ 
ous organs and tissues. These sub¬ 
stances include various dyes which 
may be taken info the body and 
which localize in certain organs and 
tissues. Then by the use of the x-ray 
these tissues and organs arc made 
visible. One dye substance is used in 
taking x-rays of the gallbladder; 
others are used for the kidney and 
urinary bladder; still others for the 


774 




YAWS 


YEAST 


female genital system or the spinal 
cokinia« A substance called lipiodol 
may be ii3|ccted into the longs or 
sinuses to make them visible. For 
the investigation of the alimentar}^ 
tract an opaque meal of barium is 
given and the progress oi the meal 
along the Intestinal tract is studied 
to detect ulcers and obstructions. A 
barium enema is given to study the 
large intestine and other organs in 
the lower abdominal region. 

By the use of the x-ray the exact 
si/c of the heart may be determined. 
The x-ray is also used in the treat¬ 
ment of disease, particularly in the 
treatment of tumors, conditions ai- 
tectiog the skin, inflamniations of 
various kinds, and for a wide variety 
oi purposes where radiation therapy 
is called for. 

Since the introduction of x-ray 
equipment Innumerable improve- 
mcnla have been made. Portable ap¬ 
paratus is now available that can be 
taken directly to a patienTs bedside. 
One of the most important develop¬ 
ments in the use of the x-ray on a 
nitiss scale has been the inlroduction 
ot mobile units as a means of taking 
chest films of school children and of 
the general public in order to deter¬ 
mine the presence of tuberculosis and 
cancer of the lung. also radia¬ 
tion. 


X-Rays — Operofor ts eidfusting a small 
X foy llicropy ynil so the rays will be Ui- 
tecled to o smoll growth on the patient's 
foot Trealmonit such os this, olmed spe- 
cilicolly ot the surface! skm, ore known m 
''siiperftciol X*ray thempy/' 


YAWS, also called frambesnu pian, 
bubos, and leishmaniasis, a disease 
caused by a spiral microorgaaisoi, the 
treponema perienue, related to the 
treponema pallidum, the agent oi 
syphilis. Yaws is rarely found in the 
United States but is a disease ol 
tropical regions, especially wlieie 
sanitation is poor. Raspberry-colored 
growths on various parts oi the body, 
especially the face, feet, legs, hands, 
and around the external genitals are 
characteristic signs. The growths may 
join to form large masses and may 
become ulcerated. 

YEAST. In the compressed form 
with a starchy or absorbent base, 
yeast is used medically because of 
its richness in the water-soluble vita¬ 
mins, including thiamine, riboflavin, 
pyroxidinc, nicotinic acid, and panto¬ 
thenic acid. Dried yeast or brewer’s 



YELLOW FEVER 


YELLOV^ FEVER 


yeast is frequently fortified with vita¬ 
mins of the B complex group. 

'FELLOW FEYEE^ an acute infec¬ 
tious disease caused by a filterable 
vires which is transmitted by the 
bite of an infected mosquito^ acdes 
aegyptij> in whose system the virus 
Ives and breeds. The illness strikes 
suddenly^ usually three to six days 
after the mosquito bite. The face 
becomes flushed and swollen, the eyes 
suffused, the lips and tongue a bright 
red, and a high fever appears, with 
pain in the head and back, and a 
feeling of extreme exhaustion. In two 
or three days, the temperature drops 
below normal, the pulse slows down, 
and the skin grows cold and assumes 
the yellow jaundiced hue, which gives 
the disease its name. A characteristic 
**black vomit'" occurs, indicating in¬ 
ternal bleeding. As the patient re¬ 
covers, the temperature returns to 
normal, generally by the seventh or 
eighth day, and convalescence be¬ 
gins, leading to rapid, complete re¬ 
covery. Complications are rare, and 
one attack gives lifelong immunity. 

Until the twentieth century, large 
areas of Central and South Amer¬ 
ica were considered uninhabitable 
because of the disastrous effects of 
yellow fever, A considerable portion 
of the population along the southern 
Atlantic and Gulf seaboard was wiped 
out in one of the yellow fever epi¬ 
demics, The first indication that the 
disease was transmitted by the bite 
of a mosquito came from Dr, Carlos 
Finlay, a Cuban, in 1881. Two dec¬ 
ades later, Dr, Walter Reed, an 
American army surgeon, proved that 

776 


yellow fever was transmitted soicJy 
by the bite of an infected mosqiidiv 
This led to such effective mosquito 
control that today yellow fever has 
been eradicated in the China} /vaic as 
well as in Cuba. Similar siiccivss has 
followed wherever cITcctive antinuis- 
quite measures have been praxUceif. 
Studies later showed that \cIlow lever 
is also present in the jungles of Soulfi 
America and Africa. It is fouiui in 
monkeys and possibly in otfier fungle 
animals. Native people are mKo af¬ 
fected by the germ, which is pri>ha- 
biy transmitted to liuman beings by 
several varieties of nK^sqiiilo. 

International tieaUh authorities 
have concerned themselves with pre¬ 
venting the spread of yellow’ fever 
into urban communities, in fhfvl, 
the Nobel Prize w^as aw'ardcii U) Dr. 
Max Theiler of the Rockefeller I'oim- 
dation for his development o! a 
vaccine, for yellow fever, 1 he 

vaccine was given to more than 
8,000,000 members of the arnietl 
forces during World War II, 

The greatest precmitions are taken 
to prevent introduction of infected 
mosquitoes onto airplanes and ships. 
Crews are vaccinated against the 
disease and ships are furnigateii Per¬ 
sons who are infected are isolated in 
a screen-protected room for at least 
the first four days after development 
of symptoms of yellow fever. T’hc 
United States Public Health Service, 
the World Health Organkatioiw and 
quarantine agencies all over the world 
are constantly alert to the threat of 
mosquito disease carriers* Breeding 
places are sprayed with DDT or oit 
to kill the larvae, and such nieasurcs 



YELLOW JAUNOiCE 


' f<A 


in recent )caf'^ ha’.c kept tne spread 
of yellow te\'er at a minimum. 

YELLOW J4UM>1CE. Sac .iai n 

DKl . 


ZINC, a metallic cleincul ^\hich oc- 
CAir< naturally as silicate and cm 
bon ate and is kni)wn as calamine in 
tliesc ierrns. The uses of zinc 
niediciiie are chieilv as a compo¬ 
nent ol zinc chloride and zinc OKide 
and siinilar pieparations used in treat 
ing the skiiu I hese are combined w ilh 
cnntmeids and dusting powdeis. 

A poisvmoiis conipoimd of zinc 


and phosphorous is used as an ia~ 
grcdicot of rat poison. 

ZYGCI^IA^ that part of die lempic 
hiMie of the skiiii lhat lies bencalh 
the cheek; it is also kticnv!! as the 
zygomatic arcli. vSorac of flic niiisdes 
involved in niaslicatioii of food arc 
aUached to it. Jt is sometimes in- 
\o;vcd in fracture of the skolt. 

ZYME5 a word derived from Ihc 
Greek, means feroieot» Many differ¬ 
ent forms of feroicnt arc used in 
medicine — for example, to dissolve 
secretions. ITie zymogenic cells of 
the stomach are those wliich secrete 
pepsin, wdiich is useful in digesting 
ihc protein foods* 


777 





\ 

\» I I f 

vUI n u I 
u I lu I 

\tx HI p tin I 
Is., ^ 

\l In in I s If ,'H ^ 

II it I 

VMitni I 

\f * f(H I I 
\l M M "'I 
\h 1 J t 
\l L 

n in f 

\! n pf I n S 
ul I 

\i i \ i \ i t in ' 

\ ! It I h S i\ 

I ft ill P >i uiHin. 

R Ml i It uiort Muh \ 
iln » H'm I 
n I k pi i lu %\ 

I f I i ini 
I I u\^ 16^ 

Ul 

til l« if un ^ ii 

4f Hi uiii ^ 

dull t il mnii KS ^0^ 

! ilk dl 

|{ l fusts k^| 

loinl d Im iiui kd 

ivUU i. tp iMikjMl d”* 
pjij il k ivifiit i ^ # 

•»pi uns fsS"’ 

\ nuiitls ''’I 
\t%, luimu.! iiitni 


ittf iniful s 
pt s n 
^ t cst s 

\t< ! V It ki s 

\vt HPt s 

\ < t\ lk\U IS id S 
\v h s 

\ Il Ik h ri Ion '' 

\ hloi h\ dt n ^ 

\ilioln 

\wlui ulf pi iM i 10 
\t hn no tin 10 
X t f l \ IM 10 
\ kl s 

fo >ntii if ni “'‘'S 
\ j h HE Ink I 
\sia 1 i 

iJki h 1 k s t Ik 01 ^ 

Cl u t 1 
\von it, 1 “» 

\ tni fjw nt m 11 

\ I of o ru i t 
\sUHUnn 1'i 
Xuonu th n 
\i I H * ' 
in ditis d 

m nilinOs ’^iS 
u! istlun i ‘'M 
in hot \ 

in Itnkunn ISX 
inpuiiphau 
in pnipm 1 O'*! 
in IIh am Hit loti ^ 0 
\sUm?niv^s 
Xtonouovtki 

\t uk I ufs p no 10 

Xduns ippli K 
XiidkOon Ih 


\ klist'm s dist St 10 
Inpoiuistun 
piinii ti \ ''S I 

\dduttoi I 
\ I ml IS I 
Vii lunfistonn !"" 
Xtlcnou^ r*' 1 ? 

\ ftjunin |0 
\duio IS |0 
\ ilusk 1.0 im |0 
Xtlhts on fo 
\ hp<i IS 20 
V ilKX t 

\ it I s I U 20 :1 
H ^ ft% 

\ lop tMi 1 
Xiii nils! ntils 

S / c. »l inds 
H ni soiu 

in Xtidi on s d t iSi 
Xdfifi iisp 

dko \ tu t nk n! ^' 
Xttit u pti d 

\c Io Ul sik In ^ 

\utint ^ 

\i Hifth t i 
Mlt vt 1 
\!l ftfO ut \i 
XiftOsnOi n 
XOt ip Hfis * 

X d kli i i 
\ n n 

X 1 Imm luon 2 I 
\ no n "*1 
\nn iphidn t 21 
\ tin I ms I 
\ f UUl{Ov\UlMS ? I 
Xnii 2s 


10 


1 



INDEX 


Airsickness, See: Motion sick¬ 
ness 

Akinetic, 25 
Albino, 25 
Albumin, 26 
Albuminuria, 26, 535 
Alcohol, 26 

Alcoholics Anonymous, 28 
Alcoholism, 27 

cirrhosis of liver from, 230 
worker as problem drinker, 
445 

Alexia, 28 

Alimentary canal,, 29 
Alkalemia, 29 
Alkali, 29 

poisoning from, 588 
Alkalinity, 29 
Alkaloid, 29 
Alkalosis, 30 
Allergy, 30-33 
and asthma, 73-74 
contact dcrniatilis, 247 
eczema, 305 
emotions related, to, 320 
hay fever, 407 
hives, 431 
itching, 463 

plants, sensitivity to, 247 
psychological factors in, 320 
scratch test, 33 
tests for, 33 
treatment, 33 
Aloes, 33 
Alopecia, 33 
Alton giant, 15 
Alum, 33 

Aluminum acetate, 34 
Aluminum hydroxide, 34 
Aluminum phosphate gel, 34 
Alveoli, 34 
Amaurosis, 34 
Ambivalence, 34 
Amebiasis, 34 

Amebic dysentery, 35. See 
also: Dysentery, Diarrhea 
Amenorrhea, 35 
Amentia, 35 

American Dietetic Associa¬ 
tion, 279 

American Heart Association, 
132 

American Medical Associa¬ 
tion, 237, 249 
American Red Cross, 641 
American Trudeau Society, 
73! 

A merican trypa nosomi a.sis, 
See; Chagas’ disease 
Amino acids, 35 
Aminopliylline, 36 
Amiiiopterin, 36 


Ammonia, 36 
Amnesia, 36 
Amnion, 37 
Amputation, 37 
Amylase, 37 

Amylnitrate, inhaled in an¬ 
gina pectoris, 48 
Amyotrophic diseases. 37 
Analgesia, 37 
Anaphia, 37 
Anaphylaxis, 37 
Ancylostoma duodenale, 38 
Androgen, 38 
Androgyny, 38 
Anemia, 38-41 

and cancer of the bk>od, 
172 

iron deficiency, 4(1 
in the newborn, 598, 6(15 
in pregnancy, 40 
rheumatic fever, 647 
Anemia, pernicious, 40 

folic acid in treatment of, 
41 

iron in treatment of. 40 
liver in treatment of. 40 
vitamin Br,. in treatment of. 
40-41 

Anesthesia. 42 
in childbirth, 44 
Aneurysm, 44 
Angina, pectoris, 46-48 
Aniline, 48 

Animal bites anti wounds, 49 
bee stings, 101 
black widow spider. ! 15 
rabies, 625 
rat-hito fever, 630 
tularemia, 732 

Animals, as carriers of disease, 
dogs, 294 

fool and mouth disease, 381 
Ankle, sprained, 49 
Ankylosis. 468 
Anodyne, 50 

.Anopheles fmosquito K in ma¬ 
laria, 498 
Anorexia, 50 
Anorexia nta'VtKa. 50 
Anosmia. 50 
Anoxemia, 50 
Antabuse, 50 
and tdcoholism, 28 
Antacid, 51 
Antenatal, 51 
Antepartum, 51 
Anthrax, 51 

occupational disease, 445 
Antibiotics, 5! 

Antibodies, 52 
Anticoagulants, 52, 235 
Antidote, 52. See: Poisoning 


Antifehrin, ."'2 

.‘XiUigcns. test io!. sn asth:r':a, 

'74 

.‘XnlihistaiTuncs. in :,ihcrn\. 3 3 
driigs, 53 
in arthritis. 
in pruriii'-'. *16.3 
Antimony, 53 
Antiseptics. 5 3 

in mcihci'se cliest. 
.Antispasnu.K.lics. in Miems. 
Antitoxin, 54 
in bohilism, M8 
.Anfrnrn, 

AN 114, Are; Rai cni;fri4 

.Anuria, 54 
.Anus, 5-1 
.AnxieUs 54 
.Aorta, 

Apatliv, 318 
Aphasia. 5.3 
.A[9ionia. 56 
.Aphi'i^disiac. 5C‘ 

,Apop!e\\, f 
.Appendix. *^3” 

.Appcftdicifis, 
eatl'jaihcs. I 

danger txf, in a.!''dor'{'iiiia! 
pain, ""S 

perifeadtis. ;ts crnTtphrola'n;, 

pneumi'ada, iniisafes «vinp. 
toms cif. 

Appetite. 62 

afhnornial. r.'.fmh ”08 
Apreso'line, 13,2 
.Aijutonts fmmor. 6 3 
AracluKHlacts Is , n 3 
Arc lies, fallen, in' 

Arrtyrtd,. 63 
Ar.eyrosis, fi4 
Arm. t>4 

Arsenic, poisimifar 
Arteries, eirenlnlms 'a*o,crn. 
228 

coronary. 2‘^2 

Arteries, liaulcmni' o| Sre 
.Artci'iosciorivsn-, 

A rt e 1 'ii t\c I e ro \!s „ (a t 
in old age. 66-# 

Anhritis, 

Ari'iticiid Ifml's. 

Arlifkial lespiigitjorn SAa- 
AsphyX!a, Rgsnscilapon 
first aid. 313-314 
Asl'H?sie>sis, 7 I 
Ascari<l 

Aschhcim-'Zoiitfek levi. 584. 
598 

Ascorbic acid, (’Viianiin f'), 7| 
dchcicticy* 268. 756 
Asepsis, 71 


780 




IMDEX 


Asphi'xia, 'A ' 
ia api'iplcM . 5 

A'^pirat:n;a As 

A'-'PiriFi, 7.' 
ai'hritr^s 
tri'Tt'’.'at I'',. A'i 
in fsu'Piicuu: cilost, ' 

r!)c!n;;;;l n; l'v\ ^;i. f' ■>(> 

/\stlicn:n, 

,\s!hctu,spin. 

Astfirna. '"'7 ”''7. Sri- 

I',nia>tiun''. ii!ul ;uicr '.-v 

Asan-in.Pisn!, 'A*. ’ 

/Nfain'inc. 

Alckn’f.an-,, "’a 

\rh!aU;’s i7up. 'A, 

Anniptia ;n nuniana'. 

'k's x I 

Atroph\'. S? 

Alr>t[Mr.i;. Pm I 7m. 17, n:.’|jP 

I nit fa-! V a. S J' 

,'\n]aoin\ w'ja p7 
AwhwA;. 


li 

I'! V , S/."' X'tMnii'r: H 

■M’Krp'ka V, 

liaiM,'". Pa,, iJ.tiMaM r-iatna 
Ha.nu; fnatn: N *. 

H,i,ai!ia. S 

H,';aAn.;ha 7“' P'” x,. ^ 

I.mh IlMPf pain, Spjti.;’ 

Il.u"!' i'H 'M'’, iS"* 
finc'tc,! I'laaa, s " 

li,H icrii,}, ’X" P*'* 7, ,• ,p'i.. |j. 

7:r:’?u 

lltAM ni! viuia, nnipts S, , 

a7n- I inUvatvltl-. 

B;a,:'Untt'n’k'i.faa., ‘7'!' 

'-'M* 

''iA 

as-,, 

liuLIfvn‘7P''''*7'„ 4<,'7’ 

H, I i 11 I m- .if 4it'i t ;■ r a | A ra. '4 7 
ll.stufj.va, 

Hj,ivf!np. I u:*ifrrn.'k 1*., 4^'" 

ll,n iH*i!!.».'!i, 

»'A'P 

f tiipv«!snp h}, 74 

|i;iU:r«A'!.'„ l'3ia Aa-^appls. fAA’ 


f^TiusM U.-SM in 
7^7'-- 

(.isMaiSc, Srrr Ricl.ct.s. 
Saiit'vy 
nariniin. 

lk'\;n incinkulisnu 45 
Ii,n.rdc)\v's tJi'MMSC. I'A-- 

sipiAinuunia ptiitcFa (nn!c? 
n.nhitnn '-fO 

ill 75n 

ip. nicns!:n;il pnrioA. 517 
-siak chtUf, :iS 

ikith".. 'antniLMl cKttact in itcfi- 
nt!'. 47 ^ 

r.p', in 71-f» 

fl-.l'’, b\ inlp ol', 

7.A' 

H( <) v.ipanip, 47 
I’u.'A. atu.i Pc4<!:si'/. ‘'A 
^<iuihiiy. 4.S 
licJ SOICS. 47 

\pcp»;'.! caPa in .ipnpAav5"’ 
ik'.l rttnsn'n:, if'H*. .AHi 
A-a nirn-'M i7| 

f’fiak.a*.!.'[ .'iul hi,An-,\iiir proh 
U'Tp.m ..-Ipuircin 
ni aka 4i;-’vpin c, 77 
rnai v.p^An,;!. I4i|. 7Mu 
•Auttp!; '•.tafnnicrnvn. 

74/, 

lialalnnn. 1U7 

Pia’i',,i5!vviina, it'- panKinsatra'-an. 
•■’Ak Sr,-' ..a-ar Daa.div 
r;{'a7:M,i'a.k,'* ptr,‘atfAfV' 
fiair. pai'-a,. liC 
Hrnrdv'A A A 

'‘Hafid- ' Xr'a C "aavstan Jr-.caaH' 

lA'fjaaai'iiun A'A 

Har.’aita j'aaH'nnni', S4U 

fk'ukrti, :fi,i 

HaA, i h.nias, 

Htaars,, i M'-'l 

I4a:p,!i'-j a.,!!,' ot jn.p?-an!\, |U4 
Bu:nA4‘-l. 

BA'umiI, A*^ 

Hfia, l,us 
Hinnu.n.pa'.,. in< 
fPf!uu.„na'->. A4( 

HiiU'nkin, A^. 
fknat. .\h'j,.aL psu 
fkUir? Sisjua'i fpaf. A)7 
Hiup'-.A lA'," 

in dupantpa"'-. canccf, 

HjMh. Si'f C'ps,;sf};i5i sac- 

nujn «'til!Jlartfn Bsrp' 

tiain > 
prcJiiatuun 
Br;»h aiunif^ca.tin ! IA 
Bunh cMiitiid. ^rr I'innraCap 
liUlt 

HihIj 'jrannrA 1 10-117 
kiirOiPPuK, i!7 


Birfh, niuiOpic, I 1 3 
Bistninii, ! !5 

Bites. St r: Animal tint! 

uuunds. Insc's:t bites 
fiiackWiuef fever, I I 5 
Black wiilow spider, I 15 
Bladder, 115 

c>'stoscopy. 1 I f'n 764 
diseases of, I i5-1 IS 
inlUinifrutPaitii uf (cysOtisK 
2h3 

stoiies in. I 1 
ti[l’srret:U>sis t>f, I 1 7 
nHiiiMC 1 PA 18 
Blalock, Dr. AI Ban,!, 1,3 7 
Hialock"! .tuvur; opertuion. 138 

BbiMonivcosis. 1 I K 

Blecdiny. .S'aa Hcnior- 

rlKt!.te, W'otnads 
abrasion, 4 
arteria,!. •“'7| 
epistaxis, ,3 7X 
henioi'diilia. 474 
iurna '"As 
ne»sc. 31 7. 5‘lf» 
pin pure. !untton'h.ii.nca, 021 
loitmique!, 3 1 1, 475, "•72 
ulcers, 53Bv.57? 

xiraruin K. ”PH 
wounds. 3'"’I-dp2 
BlepfiariUs. UK 
Bundness. aniaiirosis, 34 
cat.tract, IS2 

corneal trait'^plaritaffon, 252 
t'rorsi ylancotria, 3kn 
nipht < xeretplnhalrnia ,B 773 
trad’ioina, 727 
BliAers. i rs 

chrckertpo.x, AD 
chsiblaitis, 104 
ecerma, 'AA 
frostbite, 383 
herpes simplex. 420 
hives, 431 
ianpelipo,, 443 
pCfttplupns, 575 
sunburn. 005 
Bloufinp,, 110 

Biood. I Ab'r?3„ bcf' al.vee Red 
Mo(hI ceIJs, W!)iie Idoud 
cells 

ancn'di'i,* 3K 
cOiHUtlafion. 234,, 75K 

cross iinitcfdiip, 200 
diaheies, :P5P7h 
hcrnoplobin, 424 
kislncys, 471 
liver, 4KK 
hinps. 444 
plasma, 1A>A23 
plaickn. 1:2 
Rh factar, 137 


781 







INDEX 


spleen 685 686 
Wasserman test 761 
Blood bank 123 
Blood circulation 226 229 
angina pectoris 46 48 
arteriosclerosis 64 130 131 
capillaries 176 
circulatory system 226 229 
embolism 321 
failure of m shock 668 
frostbite 383 
gangrene 391 
hemon holds 423 
resuscitation 640 
Blood clotting apoplexy 57 
and coronal y thrombosis 
232 

embolism 310 
endocaiditis 89 90 
hemorrhage 423 
phlebitis 380 

purpura hemon hagic i 621 
thrombosis 720 
Blood diseases and disorders 
ag] mulocytosis 24 
anemia 38 41 
anemia pernicious 40 
cancer of 172 
erythioblastosis 330 
hemophilia 424 
leukemia 482 
meningitis 312 
mononucleosis 322 
polycythemia 393 
purpur i hemorihdgica 62! 
premia 622 
rheumatic fever 644 
septicemi i 666 
toxemi i m eclampsia 304 
Blood poisoning Sa B le 
tciemia 

Blood pressure 123 
diastolic 123 134 
systolic 123 134 
Blood piessuic control of 123 
Blood pressure high 126 133 
m apoplexy, 37 
m artenoscleiosis 64 
thymus gland relation to 
722 

Blood pressure low 133 
Blood pressure normal, 133 
Blood sugar in diabetes 276 
Blood transfusion 134-136 
in anemia 39 

m purpura hemorrhagica 
621 

Rh factor a hazard in 137 
m shock, 668 
Blood types 136 
Blood vessels, 125-127 
aneurysm, 45 


in apoplexy 57 
in irterioscieiosis 64 
hem ingioma 423 
varicose veins 744 
Blue baby 137 
Blueness See Cyanosis 
Blushing Sic Pigmentation 
Body human 138 
Body lice 139 

scabies caused by 637 
typhus transmitted b> 7 33 
Body odor 139 
Bocck s sarcoid 140 
Boils Stt Carbuncles Pu 
I uncles 

Bonamme 324 
Bonebmk 140 
Bone mariow 142 

iffcctcd in incmia and per 
niciOLis menu \ 40 
m blood form ition 121 
chin^ts m at t mulocviosis 
23 

chtn^cs in Icukcmi i 483 
Bones 140 146 

deformities due to p ii ithv 
lOid glands 372 
fiactures 381 

mfl mini ition of in osteitis 
339 

osteomyelitis 361 
skeleton 672 
Booster shots 147 
Borax 147 
Bone acid 147 
Boris aeid poisoning 390 
Bonieholm disc ist 274 
Botulism 147 
Bowel 148 

Bowti movement 148 Sa 
aha Infants ti lining 
constipation 243 24"^ 
diinhea 283 

diflieultv ot m appendiertrs 
38 

enema 324 
Bouen s disease 149 
Biachi d 149 
BrachydaelvH 149 
Braille system 149 
Siam 130-132 
alexia 28 

artenoselerosts, 130 
bleeding m, at birth 111 
cerebral palsy 187 
cerchium 188 
concussion 243 
damage to, m hypertension 
130 

electroencephalography, 309 
encephalitts, 322-323 
lateral sclerosts, 480 


nicniiu Ls 3|| 
nxnuuitis s 1'"^ 
n irioK p^v ^ I 
pined i! mil 
pUuit it\ I tr ii ‘^83 

Bis IS! I*' 13s 

e inter ot I 3 |M 
CVUtetMU tsti i 40’^ 
mistitis dP 
Pi els dist isc 3f f 
Bit isi fttdm 2fU s 
d K li i 21 
hill puu the f tl \ 
eolostnirn 

diet fi I nu! in III III f 
201 

of fu It f 
In St He i t mil I! m n i 
2iH 

ovtI ftttiiu in { in !i I I i 
III ^'0 on 

Hie Utun IS*' S I Rt 
pn U i\ ti it^ 

Bid! s di t IS 3 I \ 11 
teVU 

BumduhoMs S Ih ih * loi 
!\! pu itH I 
Bromide 1 

Bionefii d » {hm i St \ ffi 

!11 i 

Broikhi d fiiK I s"" I Sh 
BioUtliRe! sst |s 
Huuielsuss |^\ 

Bioutlutpr euirioiii i ! 3 I 
Bnsetlio IS St t I mU ^ i i 
iiMi 

Oev up tfum ll IlHi 1 
Biui «, IMS 
tvelniuosn I 
irs pi ipm I !h im f il i ^ 
t ’M 

Bisho 161 

Buboiiie pi n ui I 
Bile lit s V ilise iH 11 I 
Bullm HO 
Bfinum H ' 

Bmiis 16^ 

uul ill Clin if mtiiiii s 

m hami M 

Butmv s sidiilion iii iivhutf- 

Eufst 163 
Bursitss 163 

md fihicniiis P?| 

Bssitocks 164 
Bunn 161 


€ 

Cimsim iliu^an-e |63 


782 



INDEX 


i ^ 

( t ^ 

{ 

i 

f 

t I f 

c ^ 

I M I 

c ♦ 

C If ^ 

i f 

: f 

{ 


I 

I f i s 


I ^ * 

! I 

t 

n f ^ 

f * 

1 I » 

t I ^ 

I \ » 1 t 

f ; I ? / 

! * 

« t I ♦ 

i ^ 

CM ^ 

I { If ^ 

c I I r f 

If!! 
f ] I !} ** * 

it j{ f ? t ! 

c ? 1 1 

i I i 

in f ^ 

I i 'h I ^ ^ 

i '(t ^ 5 * 

( i? rit ? it', I ‘*f ^ 

I IM f f 4 r*« 0 

t ni \ i tm I M 
i in 3**^ «■ » f i' 

i if ! * f'k * •/ %IM I H ^ 

IH ^ 

f IS\ 

I I ^ il 4 ! 

i sviifi Mj 

f +ii| Ml 

I i^l! Ilii»n I SI 
c If^^f stf H ' 11' r\f 

t |S|*|ll| III-1 


III 

fiS I Ml ^ 

4 i \ li>!n n 1 

! I t IP 

I ! Ij fp M ‘^SH 

I ! tu IS(. 

I 1 M 

{ s s 

I s l> U I JIMS 

I 1 
t I 

t ! in 

t 

< 4. ? 1 S 

S It 

t I nf I S 

MM ^ 

< 1 [ ! V 

I I ! 

t MJ Mill} I M"' 

I If n ? n iti I sc 

< S I s / 

H. 

f 1, «,s 

f C 

<■ lit Mu |nt 

iiiij i j I* # 

I * 11 in 

I i f \, \ H) 

I u I n 
i ml i M 

t 1 I lih \tt Mnn> 

I ’ 

n n I ^ n P! 

I t n p I ^ 

} I 

I i 

n t r ? 'i n 

t ! f" p 

n ti I j M 
t li ^ ^ H sffi 

P, II ^ tu n Pu i 

« 

m M M P ^ 

Is 1 IlMl M 

at M urn in 
^ if Mt.|nMU<Mi t*>n 

f i 

c f 11 mi P 

* MM n In Ml 
i f nir S M Srr Sfnillt) 

{ I IdH n i ln| tiMi I 
« MHu n t ch nil 
C 4 I iii f tiuH *"*110 
h it II I m OHO 
in ‘’ll 

t nl fniin> ^ ^ 
m^hi u nn«s ^ 1 1 
st.k duht :p 


i hililicr ikinimitits 
Mtf p li tit ’’ M) 
i.1 il oof 2 ^ 1 
spin t bifid i eP! 
i hifilun dcV4.lopmt.nt 
In t sj\ \c ns ids 
fi! f vvoi K md tntcnccs 

I no 

i li wth lo me ot SIX P)7 
fritt. )j} i iKt U> u t ol SIX 

20d 

iMt h imicdiicss 4M 
fntnfil Bmet Simon test 
106 

^I’Hccb t M 
psst.h dekefive 601 
IdUh {t> J e of SIX 214 
\ H>n -k sS 

vv b im ui ti i of MX lOS 
Wei III Hi lie of MX Id"' 

< fnl lun dise ise md (iis 

tn k !s 

te rods ni i 11 
Kii>ph t n 
1 kr Old r Ik 2'kf 
e n 111 n t tl elhou d tin ii td 

MP 

ee Is u dm tsc IH'i 
eUet { Ip lls\ IH? 
dum i ^2^ 
du kenpox 'PM 
e I OSS t V t MO 4 Id 
dsplillieiu 2kCl 
nnviu 
it, tint kP 
f Vet MS 

(HI m in UK isks ^01 

hi tsi siuiimni 120 

lumophilii I ■'I 

nih elio IN iljse ise f7 2!H 

nunsMi vvptioii 160 

Unkimst IS^ 

nu ndt s IP 

mumps 

iHp'hioMs 

Nutn inn Ikek s dut ise ^44 

I'Hon ISIS 616 

naus 211 6lk 
sctikneVii IPH 
tomsls 220 
whiMimii, kOiigh 
\\ dill s IIImuf 766 

< hiklun Ih ilih 

b iihsm thi sak ihiltl 2IH 
Hood pitssmt fiiirmtl |77 
uis imlbiUisM 221 
luispii ili/4liim 216 

imfitnliiiti ot xod liver oil 
211 

Mificiioit prtfvtfiiioB of 217 

niwtiljiuMi liml V4CiiiKiiion 

217 


7B3 



INDEX 


metabolism, 96 
sickness, hygiene of the 
sickroom, 218 
temperature, taking of, 218 
Children, training 
bowel control, 203 
care of teeth, 215 
habits of cleanliness, 211 
habits of good speech, 
680-681 

self-feeding, 210 
Chili, 222 

Chilling, and temperature of 
body, 715 
Chills, in ague, 25 
Chiropractic, 222 
Chloasma See: Liver spots 
Chloroform, 42, 222 
Chlorosis, 223 

Chlorpromazme, in alcohol¬ 
ism, 28 

Cholecystitis, 223 
Cholecystography, 223 
Cholelithiasis, 223 
Cholera, 223 
Choiesterin, 105 
Cholesterol, 224 

relationship to coronary 
thrombosis, 253 
Chondroma, 225 
Chorea, 225 
Chorion, 226 

Chromoblastomycosis, 226 
Chronic, 226 
Chrysarobin, 226 
Cilia, 226 

Circulatory system, 226-229 
Circumcision, 229 
Cirrhosis, 230. See also: Liver 
Citric acid, 230 
Claustrophobia, 230 
Clavicle, 230 
Cleft palate, 230 
Climate, 232 

and tuberculosis, 731 
Clinitest, 233 
Clitoris, 233 
Clotting, 122, 234 
vitamin K, 758 
Clubfoot, 233 
Coagulation, 234 
Coal oil poisoning, 590 
Cocaine, 42, 235 
Coccidioidomycosis, 235 
Coccyx, 235 
Codeine, 236 
Cod liver oil, 236 
for children, 211 
Coffee, 236 
Colchicine, 237 
in gout, 402 
Cold, hazards, 410 


Colds See Common cold 
antihistaminic drugs, 53 
Cold cream, 237 
Cold sore See Herpes simplex 
Colic, 237 
Colitis, 238 
Collagen diseases, 239 
Collarbone, 240 
Collodion, 240 

Colon See' Bowels, Intestines 
Colostomy, 240 
Color-blindness, 337-338 
Colostrum, 205 
Coma, 240 
in diabetes, 276 
Common cold, 240-242 

as cause of absenteeism, 
445 

Communicable disease, de¬ 
fined, 243. See also: In¬ 
fectious diseases 
Compound fracture, 243 
Compress, 243 
Compulsion, 243 
Conception, 243, 638 
and sterility, 690 
Concussion, 243 
Conditioning, 244 
Condom, 244 
Conjunctivitis, 245, 341 
Constipation, 245 
cathartics, 183 
Contact dermatitis, 247 
Contact lenses, 248 
Contagious diseases. See' In¬ 
fectious diseases 
Contraception, 249 
Contusion, 249 
Convalescence, 250 
Convulsions, 251 
eclampsia, 304 
Copper sulphate, 251 
Copulation, 251 
Cornea, 251 

Corneal transplantation, 252 
Corning, Dr. I. L., 42 
Coronary thrombosis, 252- 
254 

electrocardiograph, 309 
Cortex, adrenal, 22 
Cortisone, 254 
in allergy, 33 
in bursitis, 164 
in collagen diseases, 239 
in gout, 402 
in leukemia, 483 
in nephrosis, 538 
in orchitis, 558 
in purpura hemorrhagica, 
621 

in rheumatic fever, 646 
in rheumatoid arthritis, 70 


Coryza, 254 
Cosmetics, 254-258 
Cough, 258 

in tuberculosis, 730 
Coxahackie virus, 274 
Crab hce, 259 
Cramps, 259 
Cietinism, 260 
Crohn’s disease. See Ileitis 
Cross matching of blood, 260 
Croup, 261 
Cuietlage, 262 
in abortion, 4 
Cushing’s syndrome, 262 
Cutaneous senses, 262 
Cuts, 262, 771 
Cyanide poisoning, 590 
Cyanosis, 263 
Cyclopropane, 263 
Cyst, 263 
Cystitis, 116, 263 
Cystoscope, 264 


D 

Dandruff, and baldness, 91. 

See also Hair, Seborrhea 
Davy, Sir Humphry, 42 
DDT, 265 

in contiol of mosquitoes, 
523 

used on lice, 484 
Deadly nightshade poisoning, 
265 

Deaf-mutism, 265 
Deafness, 266 
in Meniere’s disease, 511 
Death, accidents as cause, 6 
Death, decline in. See: Mor¬ 
tality, decline in 
Decay, dental. See' Dental 
caries 

Defecation, 267 
Deficiency diseases, 267 
abdominal distress in, 2 
anemia, pernicious, 40 
beriberi, 103 
pellagra, 573 
rickets, 649 
sprue, 688 

Degenerative diseases, 268 
Dehydration, 268 
Delirium, 269 
Delirium tremens, 269 
and alcohol, 28 

Delivery. See: Pregnancy and 
prenatal care 

Delousing agents. See: DDT 
Delusions, 270 
Dementia, 270 


784 



INDEX 


scniliti, 6^^*' 

DemenUii piaec.ti\, ?70 
Dcmiikenf. 2"’U 
Dcngm. 

Dental tdi les, 27 i 
fliioud.ition I educes 
Dental fiealth 7| i 
DentitiK.es, ID? 

Dentine. 27 
Dcnttstf\ Ictfh 

Dentition. 711 
Denfuie. 

Depilato! icN 2'*’^ 

DcpiesMon, Ds *. t hn lii- 
\t>ln!Knial nuLouhoh « 
Mann dt pit ^ ,i \t plo ^ !io 

MS \e*a!OM-« 

I > 0 ! mat Ills 2 " 
sontavL 2r 
DcrnioKKwt 2" * 

De^iTs Clip .Dt 
DeMfOM 2D I 
Djalnma'c, 2't* 

Dial'Cles iditiTfss fiulhnist 
2“^4 28! 

and msulm D*" 
dcvcU»piue diit in 2D " 2"*^ 
fMijrunc liainlifs to. 

V)| 

ami ohesiu, 2 ”p, 

Dnnase sn 

speuai I ulr Din 2K1 
DiaK'tes insipidus 282 
Djanan, ki2 
Diapet lasii. 2K2 
Dwpht.Hmi, 2 h 2 
triiuips, -DO 
Duiiihea 2K t 
t tuoiik. 2h I 

4,o|jtis. 2’^H 

III amebiaMs I 
in vlioleia. 22 ^ 
i>LiNto!ie piessiifiu 12*^, I?*" 
citaMoiic li\peifrnsnui 12*^ 
Ditiiinarol, m phfcl'tlss. 

Diet 

aeeitn 12 

anil denial healiln 71 ^ 

ancimia. 4d 

aiIII!ills, "*il 

I’lprif hmliltnin 144 

c«msiip4iiiin. 24fi 247 

iiiahcies, 2’’*^ 2Hi) 

iliairlifji, 2144 

dip,CHlive ilispfilcrs, 2li4 

divetiiciililis 

gasitilis, 1 

m iillefgy, 12 

in oltl ap, ■f>*D 

kw-fai, 111 wriemmicrosis, 

niJRiiiH iT!4>iliers» 2W44fl5 


obt*sit\, 1^2-584 
peptic uicci. 576-577 
pKtmancy, 605 
iciliuinf. 286 
special, 288 
biliousness, 106 
hliHKi piessure, high, 132 
m Li ii ic siisease, 185 
pieunancv. 215, 605 
Mtamins m. 740-758 
Diet in dinestive disorders, 
281 

Du’cstion. 2S8 

ilimeutan canal, 20 
ami bowel, 148 
Dus stive system, defined, 280 
Dumalis. 200 
Dilantm 200, 32'? 

Dionne quintuplets, 115 
Diphthena, 2O0 S« e u/u? Im- 
mtini/.uum 

Dis^. intcisei tcbi al, 201 
Diseases tnlectious. 450-451 
I'Jise ises inhented Set He- 
umphilia 

D>s5,ases respnatt^rv. .See 
Kespuatorv ihscascs 
Diseases, skm Set Skin, dis¬ 
eases 

Dismleetion. 202 
DisliHatmns. 203 St i aho' 
Itiinis and |i>tnt disturb- 
aiu’es 

DiUiesis, 203 

i Ichloioihia/ide K 133 
DnciltusNtis, 203 
DtveitKiilum, 204 
Diz/tness. 204 
D<h* bites, 204 
Diiuhle sision ,See l'}e 
Douvhe. 205 
Drarnatnine, 205, 5^4 
Dfeamw ?05 
Dte’*smgs, 206 
lljiipsv ,5ti Nephiosis 
I)sowning, 206 
DfUf addiction, 207 
Dfiuts S#f aha Medicine 
t best 

aniibiotics, 5| 
anlibypcftcnsive, 112 
bat biOH ales. 01 
pam relievers, 507^508 
D 1 % Ser I kilt mm tremens 
Duodenal ulcers See Peptic 
uker 

Duodenum, 207 
Dust, 20*" 20K 
tinii allergy, Id 

Dwarfism .Ve* Achondro- 
pUiMu 

Dysentery, 208 


amebic amebiasis, 34-35 
bacillaiy, 84 
Dysmenorrhea, 298 
Dyspepsia See: Indigestion 
Dyspnea, 299 


E 

Ear, 300-304 

aero otitis media, 23 
and mastoid, 503 
and Meniere‘s disease, 511 
and otitis, 561 
and otosclerosis, 562 
deaf-mutism, 265 
deafness, 266 
ringing of (tinnitus), 545 
Ecchyoiosis, 304 
Eclampsia, 304 
Ectopic pregnancy, 304 
Hc/ema, 305 
Edema. See‘ Nephrosis 
Eggs, 306 
Ei}kman, Dn, 104 
Elbow, 306 
injuries, 468 

Electric shock, in home, 314 
lieatment, 308 
Electrical injuries, 307 
Flectiocardiograph, 308 
Electroencephalography, 309 
Elephantiasis, 309 
fdimmation. See; Excretion 
f•maciat^on, 309 
Embolism, 310 
Embryo, 311 

Emergencies in the home, 
311-316 
Emetic, 316 
Emotion, 317 

Emoticmal disorders, stutter¬ 
ing and stammering, 694 
Emotional disturbances, 317- 
318 

anxiety, 54 
apathy, 318 
depression, 318, 516 
furor, 318 
neurosis, 544 
phobia, 55, 317, 354 
Emotional health, 31S-320 
Emotions and allergy, 320 
Emotions and emotional 
stress, 317, 693 
and hysteria, 438 
psychosomatic disorders* 
617 

Emphysenm, 321 
Empyema, 322 
Encephalitis, 322 


785 



INDEX 


Endarteritis, 323 
Endocarditis, 323 
Endocarditis, bacterial, 89 
Endocardium, 324 
Endocrine glands, 324. See 
also: Glands, Hormones 
adolescence, 20 
adrenal, 22 
functions of, 396-397 
Endometritis, 324 
Enema, 324 
Enteric fever, 325 
Enteritis, 325 
Enuresis, 325 
Enzyme, 325 
Ephedrine, 325 

allergy treatment, 33 
Epididymis, 5 
Epididymitis, 325 
Epiglottis, 325 
Epilepsy, 325-328 
Epinephrine, 328 
Epistaxis, 328 
Epithelioma, 329 
Epithelium, 329 
Epsom salt, 329 
Equilibrium, 329 
Ergot, 329 
Ergotism, 329 
Erysipelas, 329 
Erythema, 330 
Erythroblastosis foetalis, 330 
Erythrocytes, 330 
Esophagus, 330 
Estrogens, 331 

dangerous in treating bald¬ 
ness, 91 

in acromegaly, 15 
Ether, 42, 331 
Ethylene, 44 
Eucalyptus oil, 331 
Eunuch, 331 
Eustachian tubes, 331 
in adenoids, 18 
in aero otitis medea, 23 
Evipal, 44 
Exanthem, 331 
Excretion, 332 
Exercise, 332 
conditioning, 244 
for faulty posture, 595-596 
occupational therapy, 556 
in disease and disability, 
581 

Exhaustion, 333 
Exhibitionism, 333 
Exophthalmic goiter, 334 
Exophthalmos, 334 
Expectoration, 334 
Eye bank, 345 

Eye diseases and disorders, 
339-342 


asthenopia, 73 
astigmatism, 74 
blepharitis, 118 
cataract, 182, 336 
conjunctivitis, 245, 341 
contact lenses, 248 
corneal transplantation, 252 
cross-eyes, 339-340 
glaucoma, 341-342, 397 
myopia, 531 
nystagmus, 551 
ophthalmia, 558 
pinkeye, 583 
presbyopia, 611 
retina blastoma, 644 
specks before eyes, 340 
squint, 689 
styes, 341 

tic douloureux, 723 
trachoma, 727 
tumors, 342 
xerophthalmia, 773 
Eye glasses, 346 
Eye, normal, 334-345 
accommodation, 7 
children’s vision, 338 
color of eyes, 340 
color-blindness, 337 
cornea, 251 
dominant eye, 337 
eyesight, rules for guarding, 

344 

farsighted, 335 
fatigue, 342 
industrial hazards, 344 
injuries, prevention of in 
industry, 344 

mechanism of vision, 334- 
335 

nearsightedness, 335 
removing foreign bodies, 

345 

retina, 644 
safety rules, 344-345 
viewing television, rules for, 
345 


F 

Face, 347 
Fainting, 348 
emergency in home, 314 
first aid, 374 

Fallen arches. See: Arches, 
fallen 

Fallopian tubes, 348 
Fallout protection, 349-352 
Faraday, Michael, 42 
Farsightedness. See: Eye, Pres¬ 
byopia 


Fasting, 353 
Fatigue, 353 
Fats. See: Food fats 
Favus. See: Ringworm 
Fear, 354 
Febrile, 355 
Feces, 355 

Feeble-mindedness, 355-358 
Feeding, Breast, 358 
Feet, 359 

athlete’s foot, 76-77 
bunion, 162 
callus, 167 

care of, in diabetes, 281 
Felon, 361 

Feminine hygiene, 362-368 
Fenestration, 563 
Fermentation, 368 
Fertility, 369 
Fetus, 369 
Fever, 369 

in bacterial endocarditis, 90 
care of patient in, 370 
delirium in, 269 
in gallbladder disease, 388 
in infectious mononucleosis, 
522 

Fever blisters. See: Herpes 
simplex 

Fibrillation, 371 
Fibrinogen deficiency, 371 
Fibroma, 371 
Fibrositis, 371 
Filariasis, 372 
Finger, 373 
Fingernails. See: Nails 
Finlay, Dr. Carlos, 776 
First aid, 373-374 

accidental poisoning, 315- 
316, 588-592 
accidents, 6, 3 U 
animal bites, 49, 315 
artificial respiration, 313- 
314, 640-644 

bleeding, 311-312, 425, 771- 
772 

blisters, 119 
burns, 313 

shock following, 669 
cold, prolonged exposure to, 
383 

dislocations, 293 
epileptic convulsions, 326 
equipment in medicine 
chest, 509 
fainting, 314 
foreign bodies, 312 
fractures, 311, 38! 
frostbite, 383 
head injuries, 414 
heat exhaustion, 422 
heat stroke, 314 


786 



INDEX 


hiccups, 315, 430 
insects and ticks, 455-456 
nosebleed, 311 
principles of, 373-374 
shock, 668-669 
electric, 307 
poisoning, 589 
sprains, 688 
ankle, 49 
wounds, 771-772 
Fish, 374 

Fish tapeworm, 41,770 
Fissure, 374 
Fistula, 375 
Fits, 375 
Flatfoot, 376 
Idatulence, 376 
Fleming, Sir Alexander, 52, 
575 

Flesch, Dr. Peter, 91 
Floating ribs, 648 
Flu. See: Intluenza 
Fluoridation, 377, 713 
Fluoroscopy, 377 
Folic acid, in pernicious ane¬ 
mia, 41 

Food allergy, 377 
Food, basic requirements, 377- 
378 

Food fats, 379 
“Food for Your Heart,*’ 132 
Food poisoning, 380 
and botulism, 147 
emergency in home, 315 
miishnxan, 530 
Foods. See a!so: Diet 
allergy-producing, 32 
cause of hives, 431 
digestive disorders diet, 284 
how digested, 288-2H9 
rich in calcium, 166 
Foot-and-mouth disease, 381 
Foreign bodies, in appendix, 
61 

emergency in home, 312 
in eye. 312 
in larynx, 480 
in nose, 546 

Foundation to Combat Epilep¬ 
sy, 327 
Fractures, 381 
Francis, Dr. F«dward, 732 
Freckles, 382 
Frei lest, 497 
Freud, Sigmund, 42, 616 
FriccireietPs ataxia, 382 
Froehlich’s syndrome, 383 
Frostbite, 383 

Fruits, for reducing diet, 288 
Fumigation, 384 
Fungus, 384 


Fungus infections, actinomy¬ 
cosis, 15 

madura foot, 498 
moniliasis, 521 
nocardiosis, 545 
sporotrichosis, 687 
Furor, in psychiatry, 318 
Furuncles, 385 


G 

Gait, 387 
Galen, 255 
Gallbladder, 387-390 

infected, abdominal distress 
in, 2 

Gallstones, 390 
detection of, 390 
Gamma globulin, 391 
Gangrene, 391 
in appendicitis, 58 
in diabetes, 281 
Gargle, 392 
Gastric, 392 

Gastric ulcer. See: Peptic ulcer 
Gastritis, 392 
Gastroenteritis, 393 
Gastroptosis, 393 
Gelatin, 393 

Geriatrics, 393. See also: Old 
age 

German measles, 394 
Germicide, 394 
Germs. .W; Bacteria 
Gesell, Dr. Arnold, 199 
Giantism. See: Acromegaly 
Gibraltar fever. See: Undulant 
fever 

Gingivitis, 395 
(danders, 395 
Glands, 395-397 
acne, 11 
acromegaly, 14 
adenitis, 17 
adrenal, 22 

ductless. See: Endocrine 
glands 

endocrine, 324, 395-397 
external secretion, 395 
hormones, 433 
interna! secretion, 395-396 
obesity, 552 
parathyroid, 571-572 
pineal, 582 
pituitary, 397, 583-585 
thymus, 722 
thyroid, 397, 722 
Glaucoma, 341-342, 397 
Glioma, 39$ 

Glossitis, 398 


Glottis, 398 
Glucose, 398 
Gofman, Dr. John, 224 
Goiter, 398-400 
Gold, radioactive, in prostate 
cancer, 175 

Gonad. See: Ovaries, Testes 
Gonorrhea, 400 
Gordon, Dr. Benjamin Lee, 
236 

Gout, 401 

Granulocytopenia. See: Agran¬ 
ulocytosis 

Granuloma inguinale, 402 
Graves’ disease, 402 
Grippe. See: Influenza 
Gullet. See: Esophagus 
Gums, 403 
Guthrie, Samuel, 42 
Gynecology, 403 
Gynecomastia, 403 

H 

Habit spasm, 404 
Hair, 404-406 
and baldness, 90, 405 
bleaching, 406 
care of, 405 
dandruff, 663 
depilatory, 273 
gray and white, 406 
growth of, 404-405 
number, 405 
structure, 404 
superfluous, 406 
washing of, 405 
Hair remover. See: Depilatory 
Halitosis, 406 
Hallucinations, 407 
Halstcd, Dr. William S., 42 ^ 
Hand-Schuller-Christian dis¬ 

ease, 407 
Hangnail, 534 

Hansen’s disease. See: Leprosy 
Hardening of the arteries. See: 

Arteriosclerosis 
Harelip, 407 
Hart, F. Leslie, 94 
Hashish. See: Marihuana 
Haverhill fever. See: Rat-bite 
fever 

Hay fever, 407-410. See also: 
Allergy 

Hazards of cold, 410 
Headache, 411-413 
migraine, 315, 518 
Head banging, head rolling, 
413 

Head injuries, 414 
Hearing, deaf-mutism, 265 
deafness, 266 


787 



INDEX 


hardness of. See: Deafness, 
Ear, Otosclerosis 
Heart, 415-417 

angina pectoris, 46 
arteriosclerosis, 64-66 
bacterial endocarditis, 89 
blocking of, 252-254 
cardiac and coronary, 179 
congenital disease, in chil¬ 
dren, 418 

coronary artery disease, 252 
digitalis, 290 
electrocardiograph, 308 
emotions affect, 127, 418, 
617 

endocarditis, bacterial, 89 
exercise, 416 

fatigue, a symptom of 
trouble, 421 
fibrillation, 371 
high blood pressure, 127 
hypertension, 129-131 
insignificant murmur, in 
children, 418 
murmur, 417 
myocardium, 252, 415 
obesity a handicap, 552 
old age, 46, 664 
palpitation, 416 
pericarditis, 577 
rheumatic, 645-646 
shortness of breath, 421 
structure and function, 415- 
416 

swelling of ankles and legs, 
421 

warning symptoms, 421 
Heartbeat, fetal, 597 
Heart block, 417 
Heartburn. See: Indigestion 
Heart murmur, 417 
Heart surgery, artificial, 418- 
421 

Heart trouble, symptoms of, 
421 

Heat cramps. See: Heat sick¬ 
ness 

Heat exhaustion. See: Heat 
sickness 

Heat sickness, 421-422 
Heat stroke, emergency in 
home, 314 
Height, 422 
Heliotherapy, 423 
Hemangioma, 423 
Hematuria, 423 
Hemoglobin, 424 
in anemia, 38 
Hemolytic anemia, 39 
Hemolytic disease of newborn, 
Rh factor in, 137 
Hemophilia, 424 


Hemorrhage, 425 
anemia caused by, 39 
birth injuries, 111 
cerebral, in apoplexy, 57 
emergency in home, 311- 
312 

Hemorrhoids, 425 
Hepatitis, 426 
Heredity, 427 
Hermaphroditism, 428 
Hernia, 428 

diaphragmatic, 283 
in infants, 219 
Herpes simplex, 429 
Herpes zoster, 429 
Hexamethonium, 132 
Hexylresorcinal, in treatment 
of worm disease, 768 
Hiccups, 430 

home emergency, 315 
High blood pressure. See: 

Blood pressure, high 
Histamine. See. Allergy 
Histoplasmosis, 430 
Hives, 431 
allergy, 32 
Hoarseness, 431 

cancer of larynx, 170 
laryngitis, 478 
Hodgkin’s disease, 432 
Holger methods. See: Resusci¬ 
tation 

Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 42 
Homosexuality, 433 
Hookworm, 768 
Hormones, 433 
adrenalin, 22 
in allergy, 33 
and cortex, 397 
endocrine glands, effect of, 
395-397 
estrogenic, 331 
growth, 397 
insulin, 457 

male sex hormone, 38, 397, 
715 

pituitary, 397, 583 
puberty, 618 
rheumatoid arthritis, 68 
role in cancer, 169, 172 
sex, 331,397, 563, 715 
Housemaid’s knee. See: Knee 
Hydergine, 132 
Hydrocephalus, 434 
Hydrocortisone, 254 
Hydrophobia. See: Rabies 
Hygiene, and bathing, 96 
for the sick child, 218 
feminine, 362-368 
personal, 434 
Hymen, 435 
Hyperacidity, 435 


Hyperhydrosis, 435. See also: 
Perspiration 

Hypertension. See. Blood pres¬ 
sure, high 

Hyperthyroidism. See: Goiter 
Hypertrichosis, 435 
Hypertrophy, 436 
Hypnosis, 436 
Hypochondriasis, 436 
Hypotension. See: Blood pres¬ 
sure, low 

Hypothyroidism, 437 
Hysterectomy, 437 
Hysteria, 438-439 


I 

Ice cap, 440 

Ichthyol, 440 

Ichthyosis, 440 

Icterus. See: Jaundice 

Idiot. See: Feeble-mindedness 

Ileitis, 441 

Imbecile. See: Feeble-minded¬ 
ness 

Immunity, 441 

Immunization, 442. See also: 

Antitoxins, Vaccination 
Impetigo, 443 
Impotence, 443 
Incision. See: Wounds 
Indigestion, 444 
achlorhydria, 8 
angina pectoris, mistaken 
for, 46 

gallbladder inflammation, 
390 

pancreas, infected, 568 
tachyphagia, 708 
Industrial hazards. See: Indus¬ 
trial health 
Industrial health, 445 
anthrax, 51 
asbestosis, 71 
asphyxia, 71 
asthma, 73 

benzene poisoning, 590 
caisson disease, 165 
dust, hazards from, 298 
electrical injuries, 307 
eye protection, 344 
lead poisoning, 480 
noise as health hazard, 545 
nystagmus, 551 
psittacosis, 615 
Q fever, 623 
silicosis, 298 
tularemia, 732 

Infantile paralysis. See: Polio¬ 
myelitis 

Infantilism, 446 


788 



INDEX 


Infants, behavior, cninn, 20C) 
head bitnaiiija dv'ad lollinq. 
4n 

thumb siiLluinu "21 

ti.iveline vvilh bahv 2\l 

Iniaiits, hi)tile loiHiiru 
i ii\\\ nulk, - fiS 
nipples, ?b‘> 

oiaii'^c fURt liu Vu iinin ( . 
2bK 

piepaiine Iciimula, 2i^S 
vitaniui C . d tnrci of tie- 
sfunina HI htuhiin ol 
milh ,tnd ivi.inee |urc. 

im 

Intanis, buaist tvedme, 

2fW 

ficquens^ of Iccdnus 2^*' 
ovciieedin* and uiukitaui 
nu\ .km 

fntaiUs. Lleanltfuss. 2! 1 
t>athini* the bdb\, 7b\ 
bafhuu* bail up* illiuss, 2 IK 
? 

biitliinr IIS hi't wcaihtu, H 
Infiiiits. eliHlmi/. 2 I? 
diapcis, Ptih 
protccfive pants, 71 
slecpiiif bajq 21 ?, «»flH 
summei, 21 ^ 

InfaniN. development 
ciecpinp and v\alUiH\ 
cvcicisinr, 2IH 
heannp* IMK 
Icaiiiine lo walk, fkK 
seemp and licaHitp, 
sense of taste, 
spmln 

stnicluie atwl fiovvth, 
teeth, alienliitn U). befoic 
bnih, 2|K 
teeth, lit si set, 214 
teeth, oidri id appeafanve, 
214 

iceftiing. 214 
weiphl at hit ill. 
weifh! gam, 14*^ 

Infants, diseases and disoulris 
adciHisds, 220 
hitih iftiuries, 1111412 
hirttiiiiiiiks, 112 

bain 2* 117 
cerehfiil palsi, IS? 
colic. 23K 
mmtmm cold, 219 
conviiKiom, 221 
ctim<fm, 198 
croup, 2hl 
diaper rsesh, 2S2 
dlftphragmiitic ficrma. 281 
eexema, 3(15 
«ryihrohh«t0iis, 


level, 218 
tood ailemv, '^17 
< Id man measles, 394 
^miioiiheal intecnon of ejes, 
400 

hei ns a, 219 

iniKKnous heart murmur, 
420 

larviuMtis, 478 
m.irasmus* 310 
rickets, 649 
soft spot m skulk 196 
spma bitida, 681 
thiush, 721 

te«osiK, 220 

vvfioopine cough, 765 
Inlaiits, feeding, 207-211 
sihcdule foi one-year-old, 
210 

selt-leedmg, 210 
with spoon and cup, 209 
Intants, tood 
aileruts, 377 
cdcals, ?i0 
ci*Vimilk, 208 
tust st>hd tiiod, 210 
voaisc ttvod, in teething, 
21K 

cod liver oiU 2U 
eggs ai one year, 211 
thud intake, 209 
ftuit, 210 
junioi foods, 210 
otaiiee luice. 208 
solid tisods, 210 
vegetables, 210 
vvatci lequnements, 209 
Inlanis, health 
checkups, 215 
uKumeision, 229 
cold weather, care m, 219 
eats, caie of, 220 
fluid icquuements, in ill¬ 
ness, 2i9 

hot weather, cure in, 213 
illness, caie in, 219 
sun, e^iposure to, 213 
infants, multiple births, 113 
Infants, classified as premu- 
Hire, 196 

Infants, sleep, 212 
sleeping bugs, 212 
infants, training 
bed welling, 200 
bladder control tfalning, 
202 

bowel control, 203 
feeding the older infant, 211 
feeding schedules and roii- 
linc, 210 

spoon and cwp feeding, 209 
thymb socking, ZOO, 721 


toilet training, 203 
Infections, 446-450. See also: 

Infectious diseases 
Infectious diseases, 450-451 
control of, 451 

Infectious diseases, childhood. 
See. Chickenpox, Diph¬ 
theria, German measles, 
Measles, Mumps, Polio¬ 
myelitis, Scarlet fever, 
Whooping cough 
Infectious diseases, control of, 
451 

IntectioLis hepatitis. See: Hep¬ 
atitis 

Infectious mononucleosis, 522 
Inllammation, 452 
Influenza, 453-454 
and pleurisy, 586 
Injection, 454 
Inoculation, 455 
Insanity. See. Mental diseases 
and disorders 
Insect bites, 455 
black widow spider, 115 
Insect bite wounds, home 
emergency, 315 
Insect pests 
bed bugs, 98 
bee stings, 101 
body lice, 139 
chiggers, 193 
crab lice, 259 
lice, 484 

mosquitoes, 23, 270, 498, 
523, 776 
Insomnia 456 

Insulin, 457. See also: Dia¬ 
betes 

Insulin shock therapy, 457 
Intelligence quotient (I.Q.), 
457 

Intelligence tests, Binet-Simon, 
106 

Intermittent claudication. See: 

Limping, intermittent 
Intertrigo, 458 
Intervertebral disc, 458 
Intestines, 458-460 

and abdominal pains, 2 
action of alimentary canal, 
29 

and appendicitis, 58-61 
celiac disease, 185 
cholera, 223 
colic, 237 
colitis, 238 
diarrhea, 283 
divetticulitis, 293 
duodena! ulcer, 576 
dysentery, 298 
enema, 324 


789 



INDEX 


ileitis, 441 
indigestion, 444 
parasites in, 776-771 
worm infestation, 776-771 
Intrinsic factor, in pernicious 
anemia, 40 

Intussusception, 3, 460 
Involutional melancholia, 460 
Iodine, 460 

cuts and bruises, 262 
in deficiency diseases, 268 
deficiency produces goiter, 
398 

medicine chest, 508 
radioactive, 723 
thyroid gland, 723 
I.Q. See: Intelligence quotient, 
Stanford-Binet Test 
Iritis, 461 
Iron, 461 

foods rich in, 461 
in pregnancy, 605 
in treatment of pernicious 
anemia, 40 
Isbell, Dr. Harris, 94 
Islets of Langerhans, 462, 568 
Itch. See: Scabies 
Itching, 462-463 
and anthrax, 51 
and athlete’s foot, 76 
and barber’s itch, 93 
eczema, 305 
in hemorrhoids, 426 
in hives, 431 
itch mites, 657 
in prickly heat, 612 


j 

Japanese river fever. See: 
Scrub typhus 

Jaundice, 464. See also: Hepa¬ 
titis 

in gallstones, 390 
in mononucleosis, 522 
Jaw, 465 

Jejunal ulcer, 465 
Joints and joint disorders, 
465-468 

ankle, sprained, 49 
ankylosis, 468 
arthritis, 66-70 
disclocations, 467 
elbow disorders, 306 
fluid in joint, 466 
gout, 402 
inflammation, 467 
osteomyelitis, 561 
rheumatoid arthritis, 68 
shoulder sprains, 670 


synovitis, 467 
Joslin, Dr. E. P., 275 
Journal of the American 
Dental Association, 273 
Jungle rot, 468 


K 

Kahn test, 470 
Kala azar, 470 
Keloids, 470 
Kendall, Dr. E. C., 68 
Kerosene poisoning, 590 
Kidney stones, 474 
Kidneys, 471-476 
albuminuria in, 26 
dialysis of, 474-476 
high blood pressure, effect 
of, 129 

and nephritis, 535-538 
and nephrosis, 538 
parathyroid glands damage, 
572 

and pyelitis, 622 
and uremia, 738-739 
Knee, 476-477 
Kneecap, broken, 477 
dislocation of, 468 
Knock-knee, 477 
Koch, Robert, 88, 729 
Koller, Karl, 42 

L 

Labor. See also: Childbirth, 
Pregnancy 

beginning, signs of, 607 
duration of, 607 
Laceration 478, 771. See also: 
Wounds 

Landsteiner, Karl, 135 
Laryngitis, 478 
Larynx, 479 
cancer of, 170 
Lateral sclerosis, 480 
Laxatives. See: Cathartics 
Lead poisoning, 480 
Left-handedness, 481 
Leg, 481 

Leishmaniasis, 481 
Lempert operation, 563 
Lennox, Dr. William G., 326 
Lens, 482 
Leprosy, 482 
Leucorrhea, 482 
Leukemia, 482-483 
Leukocytes, 483. See also: 

White blood cells 
Leukoplakia, 484 


Lewisohn, Richard, 135 
Libido, 484 
Lice, 484 

Life expectancy. See: Longevi¬ 
ty 

Ligaments, 485 
Ligation, 485 
Limping, intermittent, 485 
Liniment, 486 
Lipoma, 486 
Lips, 486 
Liver, 487 

and chloasma, 491 
cirrhosis of, 230 
hepatitis, 426 
pernicious anemia, 40 
Liver, common diseases of, 
489-491. See also: Jaun- 
ice 

Liver extracts, 491 

in pernicious anemia, 41 
in sprue, 689 
Liver spots, 491 
Loa loa, cause of worm dis¬ 
ease. See: Filariasis 
Lockjaw. See: Tetanus 
Locomotor ataxia, 492 
Loeffler’s syndrome, 492 
Long, Crawford W., 42 
Longevity, 492 
Lordosis, 493 
Low back pain, 493 
Low blood pressure. See: 

Blood pressure, low 
Low-salt diet, for hyperten¬ 
sion, 132 

Lower, Richard, 135 
Lumbago, 493 

“Lumpy jaw,” See: Actinomy¬ 
cosis 

Lungs, 494-495 
and asbestosis, 7! 
and atelectasis, 76 
and blastomycosis, 118 
and bronchiectasis, 157 
and bronchopneumonia, 1 59 
coccidioidomycosis, 235 
diseases of, 495 
and emphysema, 321 
and empyema, 322 
pleurisy, 586 
pneumonia, 586 
psittacosis, 615 
Q fever, 623 
rale in, 630 
silicosis, 445 
tuberculosis, 729-732 
Lupus erythematosus, 495 
Lye poisoining, 591 
Lymph glands, swelling of, in 
infectious mononucleosis, 
522 


790 



INDEX 


Lymphatic system, 495 
L y’m p h o g r a n III o m a venereum, 
496 

Lysol, 497 


M 

Madura foot, 498 
Magnesmm citiatc, 498 
Malaiia, 498 

quinine in treatment of, 624 
M,alta fever, .See' rnduUint 
fevei 

Mammary glands, 499 
Manjcniepressive ps\ chosis, 
499-509 
Marasmus, 500 
Marc/ine, 524 
Marihuana, 5iH 
Mairiage, 501 
stenhty in, 690 
Mattin, Dr. Ancil, 732 
Nfassage, 502 

Mastei, Dr. Arthur M., 134 
Mastitis, 502 
MastouL 503 
Mavo clinic, 68 
Mcl-can, Dr. Jay, 235 
Measles, 503-5tl5 
bronchopneumonia a com¬ 
plication of, 504 
Meat, animal, 505 
Meatus, 507 
Ntebarai, 327 

Medicine chest, 507-509. Ser 
C’athartics, furst aid 
Mcditcriancan tcver. .SVe.‘ Dn- 
dulant fever 

Melancholia, See: Involution¬ 
al melancholia 
Melanosis, 509 
Melaiuiria, 510 
Memory, 5!0 
and amnesia, 36 
Meniere's disease, 511 
Meninges, 511 
Meningitis, 512 
Menopause, 512 
Menorrhagia, 513 
Menstruation, 513-514 
dysmenorrhea, 298 
and menorrhagia, 513 
Mental depression, 515 
Mental diseases and disorders 
amnesia, 36 
anxiety, 54 
aphasia, 55 
delusions, 270 
dementia, 270 
electric shock treatment, 
30S 


emotional disturbances, 317 
emotional health, 318 
fear, 354 

feeblc-mindedness, 355 
involutional melancholia, 
460 

manic-depressive psychosis, 
499-500 

mental depression, 516 
neurosis, 544 
paranoia, 570 
paresis, 572 
phobia, 55, 354 
psychosis, 617 
schizophrenia, 659 
stress, 693 

Mercury poisoning, 591 
Mesantoin, 327 
Metabolism. See: Basal metab¬ 
olism 

Metastasis, 517 
Meticorten. See: Cortisone 
Metritis, 518 
Metrorrhagia, 518 
Migraine, 518 
Ml lent in, 327 
Milk, 519-520 

boiling and pasteurizing, 
208 

breast, 206 
cows milk, 206 
formulas for infants, 208 
Q fever, spread by 623 
typhoid fever, spread by, 
734 

iindulant fever, spread by, 
738 

Miltown, and alcoholi.sm, 28 
Mineral oil, 183 
Minerals, See: Calcium, Goi¬ 
ter, Iron, Nutrition 
Miscarriage. See: Abortion 
Mongolism, 520 
Moniliasis, 521 

Mononucleosis, infectious, 522 
Moron. See: Fecble-minded- 
ness 

Morphine, 523 
Mortality, decline in, 523 
Morton, William Thomas, 42 
Mo.squito, 523 
aedes aegypti, 23 
anopheles, 498, 523 
in dengue, 270 
in filariasis, 372 
in malaria, 498 
in yellow fever, 776 
Mothers, care of, before and 
after childbirth. See: 
’ Pregnancy 
Motion sickness, 523 
Mt, Sinai Hospital, 135 


Mountain sickness, 524 
Mouth, 525 
cancer, 170 
in gingivitis, 395 
and herpes simplex, 429 
hygiene, 713 
in pellagra, 574 
scurvy, 662 
and thrush, 721 
and Vincent’s angina, 747 
vitamin Bj in treatment of 
disorders of mouth, 
754 

Multiple sclerosis, 525 
Mumps, 526 
Muscle, 527 

Muscle cramps. See: Cramps 
Muscle diseases and disorders, 
528-530 

amyotrophic lateral sclero¬ 
sis, 480 

in fibrositis, 371 
and infantile paralysis, 592 
and joint disturbances, 465- 
468 

muscular dystrophy, 529 
paralysis agitans, 570 
paresis, 572 
trichinosis, 728 
Muscular dystrophy, 529-530 
Mushroom poisoning, 530 
Mustard, 530 
Myasthenia gravis, 530 
Myocardial infarction. See: 

Coronary thrombosis 
Myopia, 531. See also: Eye 
Myxedema, 531. See also: 
Goiter 


N 

Nail biting, 533 
Nails, 533 

psoriasis affects, 616 
ringworm of, 652 
Narcolepsy, 534 
Narcotic addiction. See: Drug 
addiction 

Narcotic poisoning, 591 
Narcotics, caution in use of, 
508 

National Epilepsy League, 328 
Nausea. See also: Vomiting 
and peptic ulcer, 576 
Navel. See: Umbilicus 
Nearsightedness. See: Myopia, 
Eye 

Necrosis. See: Gangrene 
Nephritis, 535-538 
Nephrosis, 538 


791 




INDEX 


Nerve. See: Nervous system 
Nervous breakdown, 539 
Nervous system, 539-541 
and brain, 150 
spinal cord, 682 
Nervous system, diseases and 
disorders of, 539 
alcoholism, 28 
allergy, 30 
Bell’s palsy, 102 
cerebral palsy, 187 
chorea, 225 
encephalitis, 322 
epilepsy, 325 
Friedreich’s ataxia, 382 
hysteria, 438 
locomotor ataxia, 492 
meningitis, 512 
multiple sclerosis, 525 
myasthenia gravis, 530 
narcolepsy, 534 
nervous breakdown, 539 
neuralgia, 541 
neuritis, 541 
neurosis, 544 
nystagmus, 551 
paralysis agitans, 570 
paresis, 572 
sciatic neuritis, 660 
tumor (glioma), 398 
ulcers, relation to, 576 
Neuralgia, 541 

and Bell’s palsy, 102 
tic douloureux (facial), 723 
Neuritis, 541 
in beriberi, 104 
sciatic neuritis, 660 
Neurological and neuromus¬ 
cular disorders, 542 
Neurosis, 544. See also: Emo¬ 
tional disturbances, Men¬ 
tal diseases and disorders 
and nervous breakdown, 
539 

Nevus. See: Birthmark 
Niacin, in pellagra, treatment 
of, 573 

Niemann-Pick’s disease, 544 
Night blindness (xerophthal¬ 
mia), 773 
Night terrors, 544 
Nipple, and Paget’s disease, 
566 

Nitroglycerine, in angina pec¬ 
toris, 48 

Nitrous oxide. See: Anesthesia 
Nocardiosis, 545 
Noise, 545 

and deafness, 266 
Nose, 545-548 
olfactory sense, 557 
and smells, 678 


and sneezing, 678 
Nose, diseases and disorders 
of 

adenoids, 17 
anosmia, 50 
catarrh, 183 
coryza, 254 
foreign bodies in, 546 
hay fever, 407 
ozena, 565 
polyps, 546 
rhinitis, 648 
rhinophyma, 648 
Nosebleed, 546. See also: Ep- 
istaxis 

emergency m home, 312 
Nursing, 548. See also: In¬ 
fants, breast feeding; 
Breast feeding 

Nursing (care of the sick). 
See also: Diets, First aid, 
Emergencies in the home 
apoplexy, 57 
bed and bedding, 97-98 
bed sores, 99 
bronchitis, 158 
chickenpox, 193 
children, 218 
chorea, 225 
convalescence, 250 
croup, 261 
disinfection, 292 
fever, 369 

hygiene of the sickroom, 
548 

measles, 505 
rheumatic fever, 644-647 
scarlet fever, 658 
Nutrition, 548-551 
Nymphomania, 551 
Nystagmus, 551 
Nystatin, 522 


O 

Obesity, 552-554 

and blood pressure, high, 
132 

and coronary heart disease, 
253 

and Cushing’s disease, 262 
diabetes, assopiated with, 
276 

reducing diet, 286 
Occupational diseases, biolog¬ 
ical hazards, 554-556 
Occupational therapy, 556 
Odors, 557 
Old age 

and angina pectoris, 46 


and apoplexy, 57 

and arteriosclerosis, 64 

and blood pressure, high, 

127 

and cataract, 182 

and constipation, 246 

and coronal y thiombosis, 

253 

diseases of, 665 

and diverticulitis, 293 

embolism, 310 

and emphysema, 322 

eye, changes due to old age, 

611, 664 
geriatrics, 393 
glaucoma, 397 
longevity, 492 
and paralysis agitans, 570 
presbyopia, 611 
prostate, 613 
senescence, 664 
senility, 665 

surgery of older people, 703 
Olfactory sense, 557 
Omentum, 558 
Onychia, 558 
Ophthalmia, 558 
Ophthalmoscope, 558 
Optic nerve, 558 
Orchitis, 558 
Orgasm, 558 
Orinase, 276, 559 
Orthodontia, 559 
Osteitis, 559 
OsteoarthritivS, 68, 560 
Osteomyelitis, 561 
Osteopathy, 561 
Osteoporosis, 141 
Otitis, 561 
Otosclerosis, 562 
Otto, .lohn C., 424 
Ovaries, 563 
and Fallopian tubes, 348 
and hysterectomy, 437 
and menopause, 512 
Overweight, 552-554. See al¬ 
so: Obesity 
Ovulation, 564 
Oxygen, 564 
in asphyxia, 71 
in cyanosis, 263, 588 
in croup, 261 
in pneumonia, 588 
Ozena, 565 


P 

Paget’s disease, 566 
Pain, 566. See also: Cramps 
abdominal, I 


792 



INDEX 


analgesia, 
ancNtliCNia 12 4 i 

in anaiii i pLtlons aP 
in appuii!ititi*< 
in iiillHiPs. ' 
hvicKailic, 

III huisttis, 
colic : V’ 

coionai \ thicniihosi^, 7"^ i 

den i! s "! Ip, 2"* I 

d\snu‘noi I he i 2^>\ 

llhiositis ’^"'f 

gvtllstonc^, 

eoiit, 40! 

hcadatlic 4! I 

foints, painin! Ifd-* 

ui kiiliH \ s r * 

lUfljhaeo 44'^ 

nctnahn i ‘^1! 

ncimiis *^1! 

peptic nkci, 0 

pswlunn niv, ’'0 * 

ta ili>?iloUfcu\ ■'2 ^ 

Fain fclic\iiv mi’ ^oh 
F<da!c 

Paha \i t P.iaih MV vi'ntans 
Fafiticas, ^0“ 
cancel. 

fynclioii in ihabclev, 2*^4 

2-^4,, 

functuw in iliee^linii, 
paiKie.itifa, ^08 
Pantiiihcnic acid Sm \ija 
min B umiplex 
Fapanaoliini test PI 
ten siomaUi laiaru I 
PaiadH'iiic, P" 

Faiahvis, 
anitanx, ^"0 
m apiapicw. 

BelFx pal*A It.antih Id? 

muiliplc VilcfOMN. *^2*^ 

paraplcpia. 

paresis* ’^'^2 

ParaliiMs apitaiiv. ‘^‘*’’0 S«t n! 
m Nc!ifii{iific»'il and 
iwin OniliVClilal dI Mil del s 
Piiiaruna, 

Fatapicina, ^4"| 

PaTaxiles, mic'dwial 
Will ms 

Fitl4fli>filtti fiaiHlv, *^21 
fhiicsiH, ^.72 
Parka rixon, Dr famex, 
FarkiinciiiX dixeaxc \m Fat 
alyxi^ agiiam 
•‘Faimi ff\ei '* \fv 
Fari>\ if I w axe, 

Pailtiiitiori, Are 

C hiWhirlh 

Fasieiii, I t«in. Si, 44*^ 


Faxitii! ticatinent See Rabies 
Fateh test, in allcigy, 33, 573 
fkdiatiKian, ">73 
IVdieiilosis Set lice 
Fcilaasa S7V574 
FcKis s''4 
Femphieus, sjs 
Fenicillin, 57^^ 

of, ^2 

Penis, 

Fentulfud sodmm, 44 
IVptK ukci, S76-577 
Fcneaiditis, 5'^“' 

Ikiuirum, in childbuth, 577 
Fentomtfs, S78 

and appetidicitis, 58 
Ihinieious anemia Ste Anc- 
ima 

Ft uusion complex Sti Fai- 

.tntn.t 

I’cmpiiation, 
bod\ odoi, 134 
Ft 1 tin MS S(« Whooping 
unn’h 

fliaiineihs St < Phai\nx 
Fhannx "'"’4 
Fhenacetin 37 
Fhenohaihilal. 93, 327. SH9 
idienolphthalcm, SKd 
Fhemiume, 3.27 
Flllchitis, S8F 
Fhoha. 3r 
Phthisis, SKI 
PhsMca! thenapv, *381 
pHnik'iitation, sk 2 
Fill s Stt Hrmof ihesids 
Filomdal wssf. SH2 
Pimples Stt Acne 
Pineal gland, SH2 
Fmktne, Sk 3 
Pnneuniis. *’6(> 

Piimiaix gland, 5H3.s«^ 
at.ioimn‘ah, 14 
Placenta St* Afterbitth 
Plapne. 5HS 
Plasma Sm Blood 
Pfaielets, 

Pleiiusv. 

PleiiioiHma, 2"*4 
Pnemnonia, 

appemhcicis. symptoms of, 
imitated h>, 19 
and empvema, 322 
ami ndluen/ii, 454 
plennsy, 

pnemnemie pUgne, 185 
PoiMHimg, 18M«192 
acctandieh 1B9 
acids, 1HH 
acemiic, n 
alkaltes. 1HH 
aniline. 48 


arsenic, 589 
barbiturate, 589 
benzene, 590 
bone acid, 590 
botulism, 147 
carbon monoxide, 178 
coal oil, 590 
cyanide, 590 
food, 380 
kerosene, 590 
lead, 480 
lye, 591 
mercury, 591 
mushroom, 530 
narcotic drugs, 591 
sleep-producing, 588 
strychnine, 591 
thalhiim, 592 

Poison ivy See Contact der¬ 
matitis 

Poho vaccine, 593 
Poliomyelitis, 592 
Polycythemia, 593 
Polyps, 546, 594 
Posture, 594-596 
and low blood pressure, 133 
exercises for faulty, 595-596 
Piegnancy. See also: Child- 
biith, Conception 
abortion in, 4 
afterbirth in, 23 
afterpains in, 24 
and anemia, 40 
Aschheim-Zondek test 584, 
598 

backache, 86 
basal metabolism, 96 
bathing during, 606 
births, multiple, 113 
breasts, change in, 597, 609 
calcium requirements, 605 
cesarian section, 189 
cessation of menstruation, 
597 

changes in uterus and 
vagina, 609 
constipation in, 611 
curettage after abortion, 4 
diagnosis of, 597-598 
diet in, 605 
eclampsia, 304 
ectopic, 304 

examination important, 598 
exercise during, 606 
fatigue in, 611 
fetal heartbeat, movements 
and outline, 597, 609 
iron-deficiency anemia, 605 
labor, signs of beginning, 
607 

miscarriage, 4 
nausea, 597 


793 



INDEX 


positive proof test, 610 
premature birth. See. 

Babies, premature 
quickening, 624 
rest, importance of, 606 
R,h factor, 137 
signs of, 609 
symptoms of, 610 
teeth of baby, attention to 
before birth, 215 
toxemia in, associated with 
high blood pressure, 
129 

urination, frequency of, 597 
vomiting in, 597, 611 
Pregnancy and prenatal care. 
596-609 

Pregnancy, signs of, 609 
Pregnancy, symtoms of, 610 
Premature birth. See: Babies, 
premature 

Prenatal care, 596-609 
Presbyopia, 611 
Prescription, 611 
Prickly heat, 612 
Prolapse, 612 
Prostate, 613 
Proteins, 614 
amino acids, 35 
in meat, 506 
Pruritis. See: Itching 
Psittacosis, 615 
Psoriasis, 615 
Psychoanalysis, 615 
Psychosis, 617 

Psychosomatic disorders, 617. 
See also: Mental diseases 
and disorders 

Ptomaine poisoning. See: Food 
poisoning 
Puberty, 617-620 
Pulse, 620 

Puncture wound, 771. See 
also: Wounds 
Purgative. See: Cathartics 
Purpura hemorrhagica, 621 
Pus, 621 
in abscess, 5 

in blood (bacteremia), 87 
in carbuncles, 178 
Pyelitis, 622 
Pyelonephritis, 622 
Pyemia, 622 
Pylorus, 622 
Pyorrhea, 622 


Q 

Q fever, 623 
Quacks, 623 


Quarantine, 624 
Quickening, 624 
Quinine, 624 
Quinsy, 624 


R 

Rabbit fever See ■ Tularemia 
Rabies, 625 
first aid, 626 
Radiation, 626 
Radiation sickness, 628 
Radioactive iodine. See also- 
Atomic energy in medi¬ 
cine; Cancer, treatment of 
m cancer of thyroid, 174 
in hyperthyroidism, 400 
Radioactive isotopes, in can¬ 
cer detection and treat¬ 
ment, 174. See also: 
Atomic energy in medi¬ 
cine 

Radium, 629 

in destruction of bone mar¬ 
row, 41 

treatment of birthmark, 113 
treatment of pelvic cancer, 
172 
Rale, 630 
Rat-bite fever, 630 
Rat control, 631 
Rauwolfia drugs, 133, 640 
Rectum, 631 
Red blood cells, 119-120 
in anemias, 39 
diseases of, 632-636 
in jaundice, 464-465 
malaria, 499 
polycythemia, 593 
Red blood cells, diseases of, 
632-636 

Reducing. See: Diet, reducing; 
Obesity 

Reed, Dr. Walter, 776 
Reflex, 636 
Rehabilitation, 636 
Relapsing fever, 637 
Reproduction 
and abortion, 4 
births, multiple, 113 
conception, 243 
contraception, 249 
Fallopian tubes, 348 
fertility, 369 
pregnancy, 596-609 
reproductive system, 637- 
639 

sterility, 690 
Reserpine, 640 


Respiratory diseases, defined, 
640 

Respiratory tract 
asthma, 73 

bronchial tubes, 157-159 
coughing, 258 
larynx, 479 
lungs, 494 

Resuscitation, 640-644. See 
also. Drowning, First aid 
electrical injuries, 307 
emeigency in home, 313 
Retina, 644 
Retinitis. See. Retina 
Rh factor, 137, See also 
Blood types 

Rheumatic fcvei, 644-647 
chorea, related to, 225 
special schools for children, 
647 

Rheumatism, 647 
and arthritis, 68 
and bursitis, 163 
Rheumatoid aithritis, 68 
Rhinitis, 648 
Rhinophyma, 648 
Rhinoplasty, 648 
Rhubarb, 648 

Rhythm technic. See- Contra¬ 
ception 

Riboflavin, 648 
Ribs, 648 
Rickets, 649 

and vitamin D, 758 
Rickettsial diseases, 649 
Rickettsialpox, 650 
Ringworm, 650-653 
athlete’s foot, 76 
Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever, 653-655 

The Romance of Medicine, 
236 

Roundworm, 767. See: Worms 
Rubella. See: German measles 
Rubeola. See: Measles 
Rupture. See: Hernia 


s 

Sacroiliac, 656 
Sacrum, 656 
Sadism, 656 
Safety. See: First aid 
St. Vitus’ dance. See: Chorea 
Sakel, Dr. Manfred, 457 
Salicylic acid. In arthritis, 70 
in gout, 402 
in rheumatic fever, 646 
Saliva, 656 
Salk vaccine, 593 


794 



INDEX 


Salmoncili thacicna). food 
poisoninii horn. 

Salpingitis. 

Salt, 6^6 

in hot wcatlici (salt tab¬ 
lets), 421 

lodi/ed, toi pievcntion ot 
goitei, -^^9 

low-salt diet foi I'U'ah blood 
piessiHc. l’^2 
Sandt1> fcvei, (>S7 
SaiiitatHni 

quaiantnic b24 
tat contiol, 

Sat coma, 

Scabies, 

Scalp, imcssoim ol, 1 

Stailatma St* SL.ulcttcset 
Scarlet icsu. 0S9 
Schi/ophicma, oso 
Schonlem Uilmnii i okas, bs** 
Sciatica s<< Suafic iiene. 

Sciatic lU'untis 
Sciatic net\c 
Sciatic nemitis bon 
Sf a n* t anJ St i ^ S2b 
Sclcuxlcimii 2U'kbb| 

SckiOMs, 

lafcial 4HII 

Scoliosis St i Spma! ctiisatmc 
Sciaich lest. 

Scfiib tvphiis, bb2 
Scun>, bb2 

Seasakncss Sm Motion sick¬ 
ness 

Sebaceous c\St Wen 
SeboiilHM, bft^ 

Sedaincs (pain kdleisi 
accfamlul ilanmns id H 
aciniilc pinsonim* tioin H 

111 bisdl bliHHl pU‘SMUt\ I k'** 

I U 

tn medicine chcsi, Sir 
SeKun. m baldness neatment, 
9'? 

Semple \accme. b?b 
Senescence, bb4 bbs \n# n/si> 
Okl ape 

Senility, bf»s obb 
Scpficemia, bbb fj|n» |lac« 
leu* ms a 

Septic sou* chroat, Cibb 
associated wtlli rlHniinabc 
fevei, b4S 

Set rdiicaliofi, bli7»bfiH 
Stit fuisifiitii, abnoimal, in 
in mp born a Ilia, 
ill acromegah, ihstitiKM, 14 
coficeptwm, 24 k b^H 
coniiaception, 244 
fcriiiity. ^1# 
arid li>sttffecioiny, 


impotence, 443 
in maniage, 501 
nicnopausc, 512 
menstruation, 513 
oigasm, 558 
and stcrililv, 690 
Sex glands and organs, ac- 
cessoi y organs, 5 
circumcision, 229 
I allopian tubes, 348 
I lochlich's syndiome, 383 
fnmen, 435 
o\a!>, 563 
perns, 575 

pineal gland, ielation to, 
5K3 

pituitarv gland, relation to, 
584 

prostate, 613 
testicles, 715 
uterus, 742 
\aeina, ^^44 
sulva, 759 
Sex hormones 

in c*incei tiealnient, 172, 
P5. bJ4 
estrogens, 331 
testosterone, 715 
Sex hygiene See' Feminine 
In giene 

Shimdes See Hei*pc‘s zoster 
Shock, bb8 

lust aid, 374, 669 
in poisoning, treatment for, 
5H9 

ShtmKler sprains, 670 
Sick loom, mil sing care in, 
548 

SihciiMs. 445 
Simon. Iheodorc, 106 
Simpson, l>r lames, 222 
Smdoni, Di, A. M., 281 
Sinuses, b"’0 672 
Skeleton human, 672 
Skin. 672-675 
adolescenc'e. 618 
alletg) tests. 33 
habv girl's, care of, 362 
HahM'S cate ot, 203, 213 
bathing, 97 
ciuihng, 190 

changes m pregnancy, 609 
paieh test. 33 
per spit aluMi. 578 
hcHly odor, 139 
pigmematton. sgj 
Skm, discioiiition 
accidental tatloomg. 708 
alhimx 25 

in anemta, pernictmis, 40 
argvrosi*!. 64 
birthmarks, 112 


bruises, 160 
chilblains, 194 
ecchymosis, 304 
freckles, 382 
m jaundice, 464 
liver spots, 491 
melanosis, 509 
pemphigus, 575 
scleroderma, 661 
sunburn, 695 
vitiligo, 758 

Skin diseases and disorders 
acne, 11-13 
asbestos corns, 71 
athlete’s foot, 76 
barber’s itch, 93 
bed sores, 99 
blackheads, 11 
blastomycosis, 118 
blisters, 118 
boils, 385 

Bowen’s disease, 149 
cancer, 169 
carbuncles, 178 
chapped skin, 191 
chromoblastomycosis, 226 
contact dermatitis, 247 
eczema, 305 
erysipelas, 329 
erythema, 330 
frostbite, 383 
furuncles, 385 
herpes simplex and zoster, 
429 

hives, 431 
ichthyosis, 440 
impetigo, 443 
intertrigo, 458 
itching, 462 

lupus erythematosus, 495 
monilia, 522 
pemphigus, 575 
pimples, II 
prickly heat, 612 
psoriasis, 615 
ringworm, 650-653 
rosacea, 13 
scabies, 657 
scleroderma, 661 
seborrhea, 663 
sporotrichosis, 687 
in syphilis, 705-707 
warts, 760 
xeroderma, 773 
xerosis, 773 
yaws, 775 

Skin, eruptions and rashes 
acne, 11 
acne rosacea, 13 
chickenpox, 193 
chfggers, 193 

deadly nightshade poison- 


795 



INDEX 


ing, 265 

prickly heat, 612 
psoriasis, 615 

Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever, 653 
scarlet fever, 658 
Skin, injuries 
abrasion, 4 
bruises, 160 
burns, 163 
chafing, 190 
chapped skin, 191 
chilblains, 194 
contusion, 249 
cuts, 262 
frostbite, 383 
wounds, 771-772 
Skull, 675 
fracture, 675 
soft spot, in babies, 196 
Sleep, 676 
aids to, 456 

and bed wetting, of chil¬ 
dren, 100 

drugs to produce, 508 
insomnia, 456 
in narcolepsy, 534 
sleepwalking (somnambul¬ 
ism), 679 
snoring, 679 

Sleeping sickness. See: En¬ 
cephalitis 

Sleeplessness. See: Insomnia . 
Slipped disc, 676 
Small intestines. See: Bowel, 
Intestines 
Smallpox, 677 

Smell (olfactory sense), 678 
anosmia, 50 
Smoking. See: Tobacco 
Sneezing, 678 
Snoring, 679 
Sodium bicarbonate, 679 
Sodium fluoride. See Denti¬ 
frice 

Somnambulism, 679 
Sore throat, 679 
in infectious mononucleosis, 
522 

Spanish fly. See: Cantharides 
Spasms, 680 

and fibrillation, 371 
foreign object in larnyx, 
480 

and hiccups, 430 
and muscle cramps, 259 
parathyroid gland deficien¬ 
cy, 571 

in sciatic neuritis, 661 
Speech, 680 
in children, 681 
in chorea, disturbed, 225 


in paresis, disturbed, 572- 
573 

stuttering and stammering, 
694 

vocal cords, 479 
Spina bifida, 681 
Spinal cord, 682 

in lateral sclerosis, 480 
in locomotor ataxia, 492 
in spinal fracture, 684 
Spinal curvature, 682-684 
Spinal fluid. See: Cerebrospi¬ 
nal fluid 

Spinal fracture, 684 
Spine, 684 

and backache, 85 
and cerebrospinal fluid, 187 
coccyx, 235 
curvature of, 682 
disc, intervertebral, 291 
fracture of, 684 
lordosis, 493 
pilonidal cysts, 582 
posture, 594-596, 683 
sacroiliac, 656 
sacrum, 656 
sciatic pain, 661 
spina bifida, 681 
spinal cord, 682 
Spirochete, in syphilis, 705 
Spleen, 685 
and anemia, 39 
enlarged in leukemia, 483 
enlarged in polycythemia, 
593 

Splenic diseases, 686 
Spondylolisthesis, 687 
Sporotrichosis, 687 
Sprains, 466, 687 
of ankle, 49 
of shoulder, 670 
Sprue, 688 
Squint, 689 

Stammering. See: Stuttering 
and Stammering 
Stanford-Binet Test, 689 
Stare, Dr. Frederick J., 225 
Sterility, 690 

in acromegaly, 14 
hysterectomy, result of, 437- 
438 

mumps, 526 
Stomach, 691 

and achlorhydria, 8 
and achylia, 10 
and aerophagia, 23 
cancer of, 171, 692 
gas pains, 1 

gastritis, associated with, 

392 

gastroptosis (dropping of), 

393 


and indigestion, 444 
Papanicolaou test, for can¬ 
cer, 171 

Stomach ache. See: Abdominal 
pain 

Stomach ulcers. See: Peptic 
ulcer 

Stones, in bladder, 117 
gall, 388-390 

Streptococcus infections, 602 
carbuncles, 178 
cellulitis, 185 
chorea, 225 
empyema, 322 
endocarditis, bacterial, 89- 
90 

erysipelas, 329-330 
osteomyelitis, 561 
pharyngitis, 579 
pneumonia, 586 
rheumatic fever, 644-647 
scarlet fever, 658-659 
septic sore throat, 666 
tonsillitis, 726 
Streptomycin, 692 
in tuberculosis, 73! 

Stress, 693. See also: Anxiety, 
Emotional disturbances 
in allergy, 33, 320 
Stroke, 694 

Strychnine poisoning, 591 
Stuttering and stammering, 
694 

Styes, 341. See also: Eye 
Suffocation. See: Asphyxia 
Sugar, in diabetes. See: Dia¬ 
betes 

Sulfa drugs, 695 
Sunburn, 695 

Sunstroke. See: Heat sickness 
Suppuration, 696 
Surgeon, 696 
Surgery, 702 
Surgery, history of, 702 
Surgery of older people, 703 
Sweat. See: Perspiration 
Swelling, in elephantiasis, 309 
in filariasis, 372 
in German measles, 394 
in glanders, 395 
in Hodgkin’s disease, 432 
in mononucleosis, infectious, 
522 

in mumps, 527 
in nephritis, 535 
in orchitis, 558 
in rhinophyma, 648 
in septic sore throat, 666 
in uremia, 739 
Swimming pools, 703 
Sycosis. See: Barber’s itch 
Sympathectomy, 132 


796 




INDgX 


Sympathetic nervous system, 
704. See also’ "Nervous 
system 

Syndrome, 705 
Synovitis, 467, 705 
Syphilis, 705-707 
chancre, 190 
Kahn test, 470 
and locomotor ataxia, 492 
and paresis, 572 
Wassernian test, 761 
Syringe, 707 

Systolic hypertension, 126-127 
Systolic piessure, 125, 134 


T 

Tabes, 708. See also' I ocomo- 
tor ataxia 
Tachyphagia, 708 
Takamine, Jokichu 22 
Talipes, 708 

Tapeworm, 769-771. See tilstK 
Worms 

Tar baths, in psoriasis, 616 
Tattooing. 708 
Taussig, Dr. Helen, 137 
Tear glands, 709 
Teeth, 709-714 
abrasion, 5 
brushing, 271 
in children, 214-215 
dental caries and its control, 
271-273 
dentifrices, 272 
dentine, 273 
denture, 273 
diet, importance of, 215 
diseases arul disoideis of, 
7U-7n 

and halitosis, 406 
orthodontia, 559 
pyonhea, 622 

and thumb sucking, 200, 
721 

Tempcrattire, 714 
chilis, 222 

changes in fever, 369-370 
Tendon, 715 
Testes. See: 1 csticles 
Testicles, 715-716 

affected by miiiups, 527 
casirailofi, 181 
epididymitis, 325 
orchitis, 558 
iindescended icsies, 738 
Tests, 716, 718-719 
allergy, 33 

Aschheim-Zondek (pregnan¬ 
cy), 584,598 


astigmatism, 75 
Bmet-Simon (intelligence), 
106 

blood, 122, 136, 483 
cancer, biopsy in, 107 
Papanicolaou, 171 
color blindness, 338 
eye, 338-339, 342 
gallbladder, 390 
hemoglobin, 39, 424 
intelligence, 457 
Kahn (syphilis), 470 
kidney function, 475, 536 
Papanicolaou (cancer) 171 
pregnancy, 597-598 
scratch test, 33 
syphilis, 470, 706 
tuberculin, 729 
typhoid fever, 734 
undulant fever, 738 
urine, 116, 741-742 
Widal (typhoid), 734 
Wassernian (syphilis), 706, 
760 

Testosterone, in acromegaly, 
15 

male hormone, 715 
Tetanus, 716 
and antitoxin, 54 
immuni/ation for, 442 
Tetany, due to parathyroid 
glands, 571 

Thallium poisoning, 592 
Thermometer, 717 
use of, in fever, 369 
1‘hiamine (vitamine Bi), 751, 
753 

deficiency in beriberi, 104 
Throat, 717, 720 
and adenoids, 17-19 
mononuclcosi.s, sore throat 
in, 522 

limsils, 220, 725 
Throat infections 

bronchitis, as complication 
of, 158 
croup, 261 
hoarseness, 431 
laryngitis, 478 
septic sore throat, 666 
ulcerations in agranulocy¬ 
tosis, 24 

Vincent's angina, 747 
whooping cough, 765 
Thrombosis, 720. See also: 

Coronary thrombosis 
Thrush, 721 
Thumb sucking, 721 
Thymus gland, 722 
1'hyroid, 722 

and basal metabolism, 96 
relation to parathyroid, 571 


Tic douloureux, 723 
Ticks. See: Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever 
Tinnitus. See: Noise 
Tobacco, 724 

lung cancer’s possible re¬ 
lation to excess smok¬ 
ing, 169 

smoker’s patches (leuko¬ 
plakia), 484 
Toenails. See: Nails 
Toilet training, 203 
Tongue, 725 

cancer of (mouth), 170 
glossitis, 398 
in sprue, 688 

Tonsillectomy. See: Tonsils 
Tonsils, 220, 725 

adenoids, relationship to, 19 
infected, in halitosis, 406 
removal, 726 

rheumatic fever, relation¬ 
ship to tonsillitis, 645 
Tophi. See: Gout 
Torticollis (wry neck), 726 
Tourniquet, 311, 425, 772 
Toxemia, 726. See also: 

Eclampsia 
Trachea, 727 

in croup, tracheotomy, 262 
Trachoma, 727 

Tranquilizers. See also: Bar¬ 
biturates 
for aged, 666 
and alcoholism, 28 
in neurological disabilities, 
539 

in psoriasis, 616 
rauwolfia, 133, 640 
Transfusion. See: Blood trans¬ 
fusion 

Trench fever, 727 
Trench mouth. See: Vincent’s 
angina 

Trichinosis, 728 
Tridione, 327 

Trigeminal neuralgia. See: Tic 
douloureux 
Tropical diseases 
amebiasis, 34 
bilharziasis, 105 
biackwater fever, 115 
Chagas’ disease, 190 
chromoblastomycosis, 226 
dengue, 270 
dysentery, 298 
elephantiasis, 309 
filariasis, 372 
jungle rot, 468 
kala azar, 470 
Leishmaniasis, 481 
madura foot, 498 


797 



INDEX 


malaria, 49’8“ 
trachoma, 727 
yaws, 775 
yellow fever, 776 
Tuberculosis, 729-732 
of bladder, 117 
death rate, 729 
kidneys, 474 
laryngeal, 479 
and pleurisy, 586 
Tularemia, 732 
Tumors, 733. See also: Cancer 
adenoma, 19 
in bladder, 117 
blood pressure, high, in re¬ 
lation to, 129 
Boeck’s sarcoid, 140 
cancerous, 168 
chondroma, 225 
fibroma, 371 
glioma, 398 
hemangioma, 423 
lipoma, 486 
ovarian, 564 
parathyroid glands, 572 
polyps, 594 
sarcoma, 657 

thyroid gland (goiter), 400 
Wilm’s tumor, 766 
xanthoma, 773 
Turpentine poisoning, 592 
Typhoid fever, 734 
Typhus, 735 


U 

Ulcer, 737. See also: Peptic 
ulcer 

ulceration of tongue, 725 
Ultraviolet rays, in acne, treat¬ 
ment of, 13 
in psoriasis, 616 
Umbilical cord, 737 
Umbilicus, 737 
Undescended testes, 738 
Undulant fever, 738 
United Nations Scientific 
Committee on the Effects 
of Atomic Radiation, 629 
U.S. Public Health Service, 22, 
94, 297, 574 
Urbach, Dr. Fred, 91 
Uremia, 738 
Ureter, 739 
Urethra, 740 
Uric acid, in gout, 402 
Urination, 740 
and bed wetting, 100 
frequency of, in diabetes 
insipidus, 282 
Urine, 741 

798 


albumin in, 535 
and albuminuria, 26 
blood m, 423 
and melanuria, 510 
Urticaria. See: Hives 
Uterus, 742 

bleeding, preceding abor¬ 
tion, 4 

cancer of, 169, 171 
and cervix, 188 
change in, during preg¬ 
nancy, 597 

ectopic pregnancy, 305 
endometritis, 324 
hysterectomy (removal of 
uterus), 437 
leucorrhea, 482 
metritis, 518 
metrorrhagia, 518 
in puberty, 618 
Uvula, 742 


V 

Vaccination and inoculation, 
743 

and antitoxins, 54 
children, immunization of, 
217 

in cholera, 223 
in Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever, 654 
in poliomyelitis, 593 
typhoid fever, 735 
Vagina, 744 
leucorrhea, 482 
Varicella. See: Chickenpox 
Varicose veins, 744 
and hemorrhoids, 425 
and phlebitis, 580 
Vascular disease, hyperten¬ 
sion, 126 

Vegetables, in reducing diet, 
286 

Veins, 745 

in circulatory system, 228 
Venereal diseases antibiotics, 
control 
chancre, 191 
chancroid, 191 
gonorrhea, 400 
lymphogranuloma venere¬ 
um, 496 
syphilis, 706 
Ventilation, 745 
Veratrum viride, 133 
Vermiform appendix, 746 
Verrucae. See: Warts 
Vertebra, 746 

Vertigo, 746. See also: Dizzi¬ 
ness 


Vincent’s angina, 747 
Virus infections, 747-749 
bronchitis, 158 
chickenpox, 193 
dengue, 270 
devil’s grip, 274 
encephalitis, 322-323 
German measles, 394 
hepatitis, 426 

herpes simplex and zoster, 

429 

influenza, 453 

lymphogranuloma veneic- 
um, 496 
measles, 503 
mononucleosis, 52? 
pneumonia, 586 
poliomyelitis, 592 
psittacosis, 615 
Rocky Mountain spotted 
fever, 653 
smallpox, 677 
warts, 760 
yellow fever, 776 
Vitamin A, 751-752 
carotene, 180 
deficiency, 268 
treatment against acne, 13 
Vitamin Bi.'See; Thiamine 
Vitamin B.» 734. See also: Rib» 
ofiavin 

Vitamin 756 
Vitamin Bis, 755 
deficiency and pernicious 
anemia, 41 

Vitamin B complex, 751-756 
Vitamin C, 756. See also: A- 
scorbic acid 

deficiency cause of scurvy, 
662 

Vitamin D, 758 ^ 

and rickets, 649 
Vitamin E, 758 
Vitamin K, 758 
Vitamin P, 758 
Vitamins, defined, 749-758 
Vitiligo, 758 

Vocal cords. See: l.aryngitis, 

Larynx 

Vomiting, 759 
emetics, to induce, 316 
gallstones, 388 
in pregnancy, 597 
Ulcers, 576 

in whooping cough, 765 
Vulva, 759. See also: Vagina 

W 

Wadlow, Robert, 15 
Warren, Dr. John D., 42 
Warts, 760 | 




